Tortilla Flat

BY JOHN STEINBECK
WITH A FOREWORD BY THE AUTHOR

ILLUSTRATED BY RUTH GANNETT

THE

MODERN LIBRARY
NEW YORK

COPYRIGHT, I935»

JOHN STEINBECK

FOREWORD COPYRIGHT, 9 3 7»
BY RANDOM HOUSE. INC.
I

R^fldoM House IS THE PUBLISHER OF

THE MODERN LIBRARY
BENNBTT A CERE

DONALD S KLOPFBR

Manufjictuied

ROBERT K HAAS

m the United States of America

Printed by Parkway Printing Company

Bound by H Wolff

To

SUSAN GREGORY
OF

MONTEREY

JOHN STEINBECK
(1900-

)

A NOTE ON THE AUTHOR OF “TORTILLA FLAT”
John Steinbeck was bom in Salinas, California. His father
was active in local politics and had been county treasurer.
His mother had been a school teacher in the Big Sur counThe world beyond the rugged mountains held little
attraction for young Steinbeck. His first foray into it was
when he attended Leland Stanford University, where he
confined his studies entirely to whatever happened to interest him. Subsequently he came to New York City and
worked at casual jobs as a newspaperman, a brick carrier
during the construction of Madison Square Garden, a chemist, a painter's apprentice, and day laborer. His first book,
Cup of Gold, was published in 1929. It was followed, in
1932, by The Pastures of Heaven and To a God Unknown,
The public's indifference to these early works may have been
discouraging, but its response to Tortilla Flat was immediate and positive. Steinbeck could now^^ feel free to write with
some assurance of economic security. In 1936, his In
Dubious Battle won the praise of the critics and enlisted
many new readers under his banner. His sixth book, Of
Mice and Men, became overnight a best-seller and estabtry.

lished him as a writer of the very first rank. John Steinbeck

now lives in Los Gatos, California, where he studies physics
and biology at random, and constantly pursues the major
objective of his life—the writing of novels.

FOREWORD

HEN this book was written,
it

did not occur to me that paisanos were curious or

quaint, dispossessed or underdoggish. They are people

whom I know and like, people who merge successfully
with their habitat. In men this is called philosophy, and
it is a fine thing.

Had I known that these stories and these people
would be considered quaint, I think I never should
have written them.
I

remember a little boy, a school friend. We called

him the piojo, and he was a nice, kind, brown little boy.

He had no mother or father—only an elder sister whom
we loved and admired. We called her, wdth a great deal
of respect, a hoor-lady. She had the reddest cheeks in

town, and she made tomato sandwiches for us some-

times.

Now in the little house where the piojo and his

sister

the hoor-lady lived, the faucet at the sink

was

broken off. A wooden plug had been pounded into the
pipe to keep it from leaking. The water for cooking and
drinking was drawn from the toilet. There was a tin

dipper on the floor to get it out. When the water was
low, you simply flushed the toilet and there was a new

supply. No one was allowed to use this toilet as a toilet.

Once when we sequestered a colony of pollywogs in
the bowl, the hoor-lady gave us hell and then flushed

them down the sewer.
Perhaps this is shocking. It doesn't seem so to me.
Perhaps it is quaint—God help it. I have been subjected
to decency for a long time, and still I can't think of the

hoor-lady as (that nastiest of words) a prostitute, nor of
piojo's

many uncles, those jolly men who sometimes

gave us nickels, as her clients.
All of this gets around to the point that this is not an
introduction, but a conclusion. I wrote these stories

because they were true stories and because I liked them.

But literary slummers have taken these people up with
the vulgarity of duchesses who are amused and sorry
for a peasantry. These stories are out, and I cannot recall them.

But I shall never again subject to the vulgar

touch o£ the decent these good people o£ laughter and
kindness, o£ honest lusts

and

direct eyes, of courtesy

beyond politeness. If I have done them harm by telling
a few of their stories, I am sorry. It will not happen
again.

Adids, Monte.

John Steinbeck.
June, 1937.

CHAPTER HEADINGS
Preface
I.

9

How Danny, home from the wars, found himself
an heir, and how he swore to protect the helpless

n.

How Pilon was lured by greed of position to forsake Danny’s hospitality

ra.

17

ssy

How the poison of possessions wrought with
Pilon and how evil temporarily triumphed in

him
rv.

35

How Jesus Maria Corcoran, a good man, became
an unwilling vehicle of evil

v.

47

How St Francis turned the tide and put a gentle
punishment on Pilon and Pablo and Jesus

Maria
VI.

65

How three sinful men, through contrition, attained peace. How Danny’s Friends swore com81

radeship

How Danny’s Friends became a force for Good.
How they succored the poor Pirate
VHL How Danny’s Friends sought mystic treasure on
St Andrew's Eve. How Pilon found it and later
vn.

93

how a pair of serge pants changed ownership
iti

twice

^V

pmm
IX.

How Danny was ensnared by a vacuum-cleaner
and how Danny’s Friends rescued him

X.

How the Friends solaced a Corporal and in return received a lesson in paternal ethics

XI.

How, under

the most adverse

173

circumstances,

love came to Big Joe Portagee

xn.

153

187

How Danny’s Friends assisted the Pirate to keep
a vow, and how as a reward for merit tlie Pirate’s

dogs saw an holy vision
xni.

How Danny’s Friends threw themselves to the
aid of a distressed lady

XIV.

197

ssi

Of the good life at Danny’s House, of a gift pig,
of the pain of TaU Bob, and of the thwarted
love of the Viejo Ravanno

XV.

237

How Danny brooded and became mad. How the
devil in the shape of Torrelli assaulted Danny’s

House
XVI.

259

Of the sadness of Danny. How through sacrifice
Danny’s Friends gave a party. How Danny was
Translated

283

xvn.‘How Danny’s sorrowing Friends defied the conventions.

How the Talismanic Bond was burned.

How each Friend departed alone

^ ^
vi

305

TORTILLA FLAT

PREFACE

i HIS is the story of Danny
and of Danny’s friends and of Danny’s house. It is a
story of how these three became one thing, so that in

Tortilla Flat if you speak of Danny’s house you do not

mean a structure of wood flaked with old whitewash,
overgrown with an ancient untrimmed rose of Castile.

No, when you speak of Danny’s house you are understood to mean a unit of which the parts are men, from

which came sweetness and joy, philanthropy and, in
the end, a mystic sorrow. For Danny’s house was not

unlike the

Round Table, and Danny’s friends were

not unlike the knights of it. And this is the story of how
that group came into being, of how it flourished and

grew to be an organization beautiful and wise. This

story deals with the adventuring of

Danny’s friends,

with the good they did, with their thoughts and their
endeavors. In the end, this story tells how the talisman

was lost and how the group disintegrated.
In Monterey, that old city on the coast of California,
these things are well known, and they are repeated and

sometimes elaborated. It is well that this cycle be put

down on paper so that in a future time scholars, hearI

ing the legends, may not say as they say of Arthur and
of Roland and of Robin Hood— “There was no Danny

nor any group of Danny’s

friends,

nor any house.

Danny is a nature god and his friends primitive symbols
of the wind, the sky, the sun.” This history is designed

now and ever to keep the sneers from the lips of sour
scholars.

Monterey sits on the slope of a hill, with a blue bay
below it and with a forest of tall dark pine trees at its
back.

The lower parts of the town are inhabited by

Americans, Italians, catchers and canners of fish. But

on the hill where the forest and the town intermingle,
where the streets are innocent of asphalt and the corners free of street lights, the old inhabitants of Mon-

^ lo

terey

are

erabattled

as

the

Ancient

Britons

are

embattled in Wales. These are the paisanos.

They live in old wooden houses set in weedy yards,
and the pine trees from the forest are about the houses.

The paisanos are clean of commercialism, free of the
complicated systems of American business, and, having

nothing that can be stolen, exploited or mortgaged, that
system has not attacked them very vigorously.

What is a paisano? He is a mixture of Spanish, Indian,

Mexican and assorted Caucasian bloods. His an-

cestors have lived in California for a

hundred or two

He speaks English with a paisano accent and
Spanish with a paisano accent. When questioned conyears.

cerning his race, he indignantly claims pure Spanish

blood and rolls up his sleeve to show that the soft inside
of his arm is nearly white. His color, like that of a well-

browned meerschaum pipe, he ascribes to sunburn. He
is

a paisano, and he lives in that uphill district above

the town of Monterey called Tortilla Flat, although it
isn’t a flat at all.

Danny was a paisano, and he grew up in Tortilla Flat
and every one liked him, but he did not stand out particularly from the screeching children of Tortilla Flat.

^

11

He was related to nearly every one in the Flat by blood
or romance. His grandfather was an important man
who owned two small houses in Tortilla Flat and was
respected for his wealth. If the growing

Danny pre-

ferred to sleep in the forest, to work on ranches and to

wrest his food and wine from an umvilling world,

it

was not because he did not have influential relatives.

Danny was small and dark and intent. At twenty-five
his legs were bent to the exact curves of a hoxse’s sides.

Now when Danny was twenty-five years old, the war
with Germany was declared. Danny and his friend Pilon
(Pilon,

by the way, is something thrown in when a

trade

concluded—a boot) had two gallons of wine

is

when they heard about the war. Big Joe Portagee saw
the glitter of the bottles among the pines and he joined

Danny and Pilon.
As the wine went down in the bottles, patriotism
arose in the three men.

And when the wine was gone

they went down the hiU arm in arm for comradeship and
safety, and they walked into

Monterey. In front of an

enlistment station they cheered loudly for America and

dared Germany to do her worst. They howled menaces
at the

German Empire until the enlistment sergeant

^

15!

^

awakened and put on his uniform and came into the
street to silence them.

He remained to enlist them.

The sergeant lined them up in front of his desk.
They passed everything but the sobriety test and then
the sergeant began his questions with' Pilon.

“What branch do you want to go in?”
“I don’ give a god-dam,” said Pilon jauntily.
"I guess we need men like you in the infantry.” And

Pilon was written so.

He turned then to Big Joe, and the Portagee was getting sober. “Where do you want to go?”
“I want to go home,” Big Joe said miserably.

The sergeant put him in the infantry too. Finally he
confronted

Danny, who was sleeping on his feet

“Where do you want to go?”
“Huh?”
“I say, what branch?”

“What you mean, ‘branch’?”
“What can you do?”
“Me? I can do anything.”

“What did you do before?”
“Me? I’m a mule skinner.”
“Oh, you are? How many mules can you drive?”

Danny leaned forward, vaguely and professionally,

“How many you got?”
“About thirty thousand,” said the sergeant.

Danny waved his hand. “String ’em up!” he said.

And so Danny went to Texas and broke mules for the
duration of the war. And Pilon marched about

Oregon

with the infantry, and Big Joe, as shall be later
clear, went to jail.

^

15

^

made

I

How Danny, home from the wars, found himself
an heir, and how he swore to protect the helpless.

HEN Danny came home
from the army he learned that he was an heir and an

owner of property. The viejo, that is the grandfather,

had died leaving Danny the two small houses on Tortilla Flat.

When Danny heard about it he was a little weighed
down with tiie responsibility of ownership. Before he
ever went to look at his property he bought a gallon of

red wine and drank most of it himself. The weight of
responsibility left him then, and his very worst nature

came to the surface. He shouted, he broke a few chairs
in a poolroom on Alvarado Street; he had two short but

glorious fights. No one paid much attention to Danny.

At

last

his wavering bow-legs took

^ 17

£l>

him toward the

wharf where, at this early hour in the morning, the
Italian fishermen were walking

down in rubber boots

to go out to sea.

Race antipathy overcame Danny’s good sense.

He

menaced the fishermen. “Sicilian bastards,” he called
them, and “Scum from the prison island,” and “Dogs
of dogs of dogs.” He cried, "Chinga tu madre, Pio]o."

He thumbed his nose and made obscene gestures below
his waist. The fishermen only grinned and shifted their

oars and said, “Hello, Danny. When’d

you get home?

Come around to-night. We got new wine.”
Danny was outraged. He screamed, "Pon un condo
a la cabeza.”

They called, “Good-by, Danny. See you to-night.”

And they climbed into their little boats and rowed out
to the lampara launches and started their engines and

chugged away.

Danny was insulted. He walked back up Alvarado
Street, breaking windows as he went, and in the second

block a policeman took him in hand. Danny’s great respect for the law caused him to go quietly. If he had

not just been discharged from the army after the victory
over Germany, he would have been sentenced to six

^

i8

^

,

months. As It was, the judge gave him only thirty days.

And so for one month Danny sat on his cot in the
Monterey city jail. Sometimes he drew obscene pictures

on the walls, and sometimes he thought over his army
career.

Time hung heavy on Danny’s hands there in

his cell in the city jail.

Now and then a drunk was put

in for the night, but for the most part crime in

Mon-

terey was stagnant, and Danny was lonely. The bedbugs

bothered him a little at first, but as they got used to the
taste of him and he grew accustomed to their bites, they

got along peacefully.

He started playing a satiric game. He caught a bedbug, squashed it against the wall, drew a circle around
it with

a pencil and named it "Mayor Clough.” Then

he caught others and named them after the City Council.

In a little while he had one wall decorated with

squashed bedbugs, each named for a local dignitary.

He drew ears and tails on them, gave them big noses
and mustaches. Tito Ralph, the jailer, was scandalized;
but he made no complaint because Danny had not iii
eluded either the justice of the peace who had sentenced

him, nor any of the police force. He had a vast respect
for the law.

^ 19 ^

One night when the jail was lonely, Tito Ralph came
into Danny’s cell bearing two bottles of wine

An hour

later he went out for more wine, and Danny went with

him. It was cheerless in the jail. They stayed at Torrelli’s,

where they bought the wine, until Torrelli threw

them out. After that Danny went up among the pines
and fell asleep, while Tito Ralph staggered back and
reported his escape.

When the brilliant sun awakened Danny about noon,
he determined to hide all day to escape pursuit. He ran
and dodged behind bushes. He peered out of the undergrowth like a hunted fox. And, at evening, the rules
having been satisfied, he came out and went about his
business.

Danny’s business was fairly direct. He went to the
back door of a restaurant. “Got any old bread I can
give my dog?” he asked the cook. And while that gullible man was wrapping up the food,

Danny stole two

slices of ham, four eggs, a lamb chop and a fly swatter.

“I will pay you sometime,” he said.

“No need to pay for scraps. I throw them away if
you don’t take them.”

Danny felt better about the theft then. If that was the

^ 20

way they felt, on the surface he was guiltless. He went
back to Torrelli’s, traded the four eggs, the lamb chop

and the fly swatter for a water glass of grappa and re*
tired toward the woods to cook his supper.

The night was dark and damp. The fog hung like
limp gauze among the black pines that guard the land-

ward limits of Monterey. Danny put his head down

and hurried for the shelter of the woods. Ahead of him
he made out another hurrying figure; and as he nar-

rowed the distance, he recognized the scuttling walk of
his old friend Pilon.

Danny was a generous man, but

he recalled that he had sold all his food except the two
slices of

ham and the bag of stale bread.

"I will pass Pilon by,” he decided. “He walks like a

man who is full of roast turkey and things like that.”
Then suddenly Danny noticed that Pilon clutched
his coat lovingly across his bosom.

“Ai, Pilon, amigo!" Danny cried.

Pilon scuttled on

faster.

“Pilon, my little friend!

Danny broke into a trot.

Where goest thou so fast?”

Pilon resigned himself to the inevitable and waited.

Danny approached warily, but his tone was enthusiastic
“I looked for thee, dearest of little angelic friends, for

see, I

have here two great steaks from God’s own pig,

and a sack of sweet white bread. Share my bounty,
Pilon, little dumpling.”

Pilon shrugged his shoulders. “As you say,” he muttered savagely. They walked on together into the woods.

Pilon was puzzled. At length he stopped and faced his
friend. "Danny,” he asked sadly,

“how knewest thou I

had a bottle of brandy under my coat?”
“Brandy?” Danny cried “Thou hast brandy? Perhaps
it is

for some sick old mother,” he said naively. "Per-

faaf« thou keepest it for Our Lord Jesus when

again.

He comes

Who am I, thy friend, to judge the destination
2^

if

of this brandy? I am not even sure thou hast it. Besides
I

am not thirsty. I would not touch this brandy. Thou

art welcome to this big roast of pork I have, but as for

thy brandy, that is thine own.”

Pilon answered him sternly, "Danny, I do not mind
sharing my brandy with you, half and halt. It is my duty
to see you do not drink it all.”

Danny dropped the subject then. "Here in the clearing I will cook this pig, and you will toast the sugar
cakes in this bag here. Put thy brandy here, Pilon. It
is

better here, where we can see it, and each other."

They built a fire and broiled the ham and ate the
stale bread. The brandy receded quickly down the bottle. After they

had eaten, they huddled near the fire and

sipped delicately at the bottle like effete bees. And the
fog came down upon them and grayed their coats with
moisture. The wind sighed sadly in the pines about them.

And after a time, a loneliness fell upon Danny and
Pilon. Danny thought of his lost friends.
I

“Where is Arthur Morales?” Danny asked, turning

|is palms

up and thrusting his arms forward. “Dead in

feance,” he answered himself, turning the palms down

pd dropping his arms in despair. “Dead for his coun^

^

2.«5

—
try.

Dead in a foreign land. Strangers walk near his

grave and they do not know Arthur Morales lies there.”

He raised his hands palms upward again. “Where is
Pablo, that good man?”

“In jail,” said Pilon. “Pablo stole a goose and hid in
the brush; and that goose bit Pablo and Pablo cried out

and so was caught. Now he lies in jail for six months.”

Danny sighed and changed the
realized that

subject,

for

he

he had prodigally used up the only ac-

quaintance in any way fit for oratory. But the loneliness was still on him and demanded an outlet.

“Here

we sit,” he began at last.
“—broken hearted,” Pilon added rhythmically.
"No, this is not a poem,” Danny said. “Here we sit,
homeless.

We gave our lives for our country, and now

we have no roof over our head

”

"We never did have,” Pilon added helpfully.
Danny drank dreamily until Pilon touched his elbow
and took the bottle. “That reminds me,” Danny said,
“of a story of a man who owned two whore houses-

His mouth dropped open. “Pilonl” he cried. “PilonS

my little fat duck of a baby friend. I had forgottenl 1
am an heirl I own two houses.”

^ 84 ^

“Whore houses?” Pilon asked hopefully. “Thou art
a drunken liar,” he continued.

“No, Pilon.

I tell

the truth.

The viejo died. I am

the heir. I, the favorite grandson.”

“Thou art the only grandson,” said die realist, Pilon
"Where are these houses?”
"You know the viejo’s house on Tortilla Flat, Pilon?”
“Here in Monterey?”
‘Tes, here in Tortilla Flat.”

“Are they any good, these houses?”

Danny sank back, exhausted widi emotion. “I do not
know. I forgot I owned them.”
Pilon sat silent and absorbed. His face grew mournful.

He threxv a handful of pine needles on the fire,

watched the flames climb frantically among them and
die.

For a long time he looked into Danny's face with

deep anxiety, and then Pilon sighed noisily, and again

he sighed. “Now it is over,” he said sadly. “Now the
great times are done. Thy friends will mourn, but noth-

ing will come of their mourning.”

Danny put down the bottle, and Pilon picked it up
and set it in his own lap.

^

demanded "What do

-Now what is over?" Danny

one

Pdon went on. “When
money I would share
thinks, 'If I had
is poor, one
come an
But let that money

^“"lUsmt the first time,"
wid. my good Mends.’
charity flies away.

So it is with thee, my

once-Men

man of
friends Thou art a
Thou art lifted above thy
who share
forget thy Mends
property. Thou wilt
even their >>tandy."
erred.
Danny. “Not I," he

everything with thee,

His words upset
never forget thee,

Pilon.”

“So you tltink now.”

you have two houses to
will be a poor paisano,

Danny

I will

said Pilon coldly.

sleep in, then you

“But when

will see. Pilon

while you eat with the

mayor

and held himself upright
have is thine.
I swear, what I

arose unsteadily

against a tree. “Pilon,

While I have a house, thou

hast a house. Give

drink.”

me a
,.

believe
“I must see this to

Pilon said in a dis-

it,”

were
be a world wonder if it
couraged voice. “It would
to look upon it.
would come a thousand miles

Men
And braides, tlie bottle is empty.”

so.

^ 86 ^

II

How Pilon was lured by greed of position to forsake Danny’s hospitality.

i HE lawyer left them at
the gate of the second house and climbed into his Ford

and stuttered down the hill into Monterey.

Danny and Pilon stood in front of the paintless picket
fence and looked with admiration at the property, a

low house streaked with old whitewash, uncurtained

windows blank and blind. But a great pink rose of Castile was on the porch, and grandfather geraniums grew

among the weeds in the front yard.
“This is the best of the two,” said Pilon. “It is bigger
than the other.”

Danny held a new skeleton key in his hand. He tiptoed over the rickety porch and unlocked the front
door. The main room was just as it had been when the

^ 27 ^

Viejo had lived there. The ted rose calendar for 1906,

the silk banner on the wall, with Fighting Bob Evans

looking between the super-structures of a battleship,
the bunch of red paper roses tacked up, the strings of

dusty red pepjiers and garlic, the air-tight stove, the battered rocking chairs.

Pilon looked in the door. “Three rooms,” he said
breathlessly, “and a bed and a stove.

We will be happy

here, Danny.”

Danny moved cautiously into the house. He had
bitter memories of the viejo. Pilon darted ahead of him.

and into the kitchen. “A sink with a faucet,” he cried.

He turned the handle. “No water. Danny, you must
have the company turn on the water.”

They stood and smiled at each other. Pilon noticed
that the worry of property was settling on Danny’s face.

No more in life would that face be free of care. No
more would Danny break windows now that he had
windows of his own to break. Pilon had been right—
he had been raised among his

fellows.

His shoulders

had straightened to withstand the complexity of life.

But one cry of pain escaped him before he left for all
time his old and simple existence.

^ 28 ^

“Pilon,” he said sadly, “I wish you owned it and I

could come to live with you.”

While Danny went to Monterey to have the water
turned on, Pilon wandered into the weed-tangled back
yard. Fruit trees were there, bony and black with age,

and gnarled and broken from neglect. A few tent-like
chicken coops lay

among the weeds, A pile of rusty

barrel hoops, a heap of ashes

and a sodden mattress.

Pilon looked over the fence into Mrs. Morales’ chicken
yard, and after a moment of consideration he opened

a few small holes in the fence for the hens. “They will
like to make nests in the tall weeds.” he thought kindly.

He considered how he could make a figure-four trap in
case tlie roosters came in too

and bothered the hens

and kept them from the nests. “We will live happily,”
he thought again.

Danny came back indignant from Monterey. “That
company wants a deposit,” he said.
“Deposit?”
"Yes. They want three dollars before they will turn

on the water.”
“Three dollars,” Pilon said severely, “is three gallons

^ 29

of wine.

And when that is gone, we will borrow a

bucket of water from Mrs. Morales, next door.”

“But we haven’t three dollars for wine.”
“I know,” Pilon said. “Maybe we can borrow a little

wine from Mrs. Morales.”

The afternoon passed. “To-morrow we will settle
down,” Danny announced. “To-morrow we will clean
and scrub. And you, Pilon,

will cut the

weeds and

throw the trash in the gulch.”

"The weeds?” Pilon
weeds"

cried in horror.

“Not those

He explained his theory of Mrs.

Morales’

chickens.

Danny agreed immediately. “My friend,” he said, “I

am glad you have come to live with me. Now, while
I collect

a

little

wood, you must get something for

dinner.”
Pilon, remembering his brandy, thought this unfair.

“I am getting in debt to him,” he thought bitterly. “My

freedom will be cut ofiE. Soon I shall be a slave because
of this Jew’s house.” But he did go out to look for some
dinner.

Two blocks away, near the edge of the pine wood,
he came upon a half-grown Plymouth Rock rooster

^ 30 ^

scratching in the road. It had come to that adolescent

age when its voice cracked, when its legs and neck and
breast were naked. Perhaps because he had been think-

ing of Mrs. Morales’ hens in a charitable vein, this little
rooster engaged Pilon’s sympathy. He walked slowly on

toward the dark pine woods, and the chicken ran ahead
of him.

Pilon mused, “Poor

little

bare fowl.

How cold it

must be for you in the early morning, when the dew
falls

and the air grows cold with the dawn. The good

God is not always so good to little beasts,” And he
thought, “Here you play in the street, little chicken.

Some day an automobile will run over you; and if it
kills you, that will be the best that can happen. It may
only break your leg or your wing. Then all of your life

you will drag along in misery. Life is too hard for you,
little bird.”

He moved slowly and cautiously. Now and then the
chicken tried to double back, but always there was
Pilon in the place it-chose to go. At last it disappeared
into the pine forest, and Pilon sauntered after it.

To the glory of his soul be it said that no cry of pain
came from that thicket. That chicken, which Pilon had

^

^

of wine.

And when that is gone, we will borrow a

bucket of water from Mrs. Morales, next door.”

“But we haven’t three dollars for wine.”
“I know,” Pilon said. “Maybe we can borrow a little

wine from Mrs. Morales.”

The afternoon passed. “To-morrow we will settle
down,” Danny announced. “To-morrow we will clean
and scrub. And you,

Pilon, will cut the

weeds and

throw the trash in the gulch.”

“The weeds?” Pilon
weeds.”

cried in horror.

“Not those

He explained his theory of Mrs.

Morales’

chickens.

Danny agreed immediately. "My friend,” he said, “I

am glad you have come to live with me. Now, while
I collect

a

little

wood, you must get something for

dinner.”
Pilon, remembering his brandy, thought this unfair.
“I am getting in debt to him,” he thought bitterly. “My

freedom will be cut off. Soon I shall be a slave because
of this Jew’s house.” But he did go out to look for some

dinner.

Two blocks away, near the edge of the pine wood,
he came upon a half-grown Plymouth Rock rooster

^ 30

scratching in the road. It had come to that adolescent

age when its voice cracked, when its legs and neck and
breast were naked. Perhaps because he had been think-

ing of Mrs. Morales’ hens in a charitable vein, this little
rooster engaged Pilon’s sympathy. He tvalked slowly on

toward the dark pine woods, and the chicken ran ahead
of him.

Pilon mused, “Poor

little

bare fowl.

How cold it

must be for you in the early morning, when the dew
falls and

the air grows cold with the dawn. The good

God is not always so good to little beasts.” And he
thought, “Here you play in the street, little chicken.

Some day an automobile will run over you; and if it
kills you, that will be the best that can happen. It

may

only break your leg or your wing. Then all of your life

you will drag along in misery. Life is too hard for you.
little

bird.”

He moved slowly and cautiously. Now and then the
chicken tried to double back, but always there was
Pilon in the place it, chose to go. At last it disappeared
into the pine forest, and Pilon sauntered after it.

To the glory of his soul be it said that no cry of pain
came from that thicket. That chicken, which Pilon had

^

31

prophesied might live painfully, died peacefully, or at
least quietly.

And this is no little tribute to Pilon’s tech-

nique.

Ten minutes later he emerged from the woods and
walked back toward Danny’s house. The little rooster,
picked and dismembered, was distributed in his pockets.
If there was one rule of conduct more strong than any

other to Pilon,

it

was this: Never under any circum-

stances bring feathers, head or feet home, for without

these a chicken cannot be identified.

In the evening they had a fire of cones in the air-tight
stove. The flames growled in the chimney.

Pilon, well-fed,

Danny and

warm and happy, sat in the rocking

chairs and gently teetered back

and forth. At dinner

they had used a piece of candle, but now only the light

from the stove cracks dispelled the darkness of the room.

To make it perfect, rain began to patter on the roof.
Only a little leaked through, and that in places where
no one wanted to sit anyway.
“It

is

good, this,” Pilon said.

“Think of the nights

when we slept in the cold. This is the way to live.”
“Yes,

and it is strange,” Danny said. “For years I

had no house. Now I have two. I cannot sleep in two
houses.”

Pilon hated waste. “This very thing has been bother-

ing me. Why don’t you rent the other house?” he suggested.

Danny’s feet crashed down on the floor “Pilon,” he
cried.

“Why didn’t I think of it!” The idea grew more

familiar. “But who will rent it, Pilon?”

“I will rent it,” said Pilon. “I will pay ten dollars

a month in rent.”
“Fifteen,”

Danny insisted

“It’s

a good house. It is

worth fllteen.”
Pilon agreed grumbling. But he would have agreed
to much more, for he saw the elevation that came to a

man who lived in his own house; and Pilon longed to
feel that elevation.

“It

is

agreed, then,”

lent my house. Oh,

I

Danny concluded. “You will

will be a

good landlord, Pilon.

I will not bother you.”

Pilon, except for his year in the army,

had nevet

possessed fifteen dollars in his life. But, he thought, it

would be a month before the rent was due, and who
could tell what might happen in a month

They teetered contentedly by the fire. After a while
Danny went out for a few moments and returned with
some apples. “The rain would have spoiled them anyway,” he apologized.
Pilon, not to be outdone, got

up and lighted the

candle; he went into the bedroom and in a moment re-

turned with a wash bowl and pitcher, two red glass vases

and a bouquet of ostrich plumes. “It is not good to have
so many breakable things around,” he said. “When they

are broken you become sad. It is much better never to

have had them.” He picked the paper roses from the
wall. “A compliment for Senora Torrelli,” he explained

as he went out the door.

Shortly afterward he returned, wet through ftom the
rain, but triumphant in manner, for he had a gallon jug

of red wine in his hand.

They argued bitterly later, but neither cared who
won, for they were tired with the excitements of the

The wine made them drowsy, and they went to
sleep on the floor. The fire died down; the stove cricked
as it cooled. The candle tipped over and expired in its
own grease, with little blue, protesting flares. The house
day.

was dark and quiet and peaceful.

$4

3

Ill

How the poison of possessions wrought with Pilon
and how evil temporarily triumphed in him.

The next day Pilon went
to live in the other house. It was exactly like Danny’s

house, only smaller. It had its pink rose of Castile over

the porch, its weed-grown yard, its ancient, barren fruit
trees, its red

geraniums—and Mrs. Soto’s chicken yard

was next door.

Danny became a great man, having a house to rent,
and Pilon went up the social scale by renting a house.
It is

impossible to say whether Danny expected any

rent, or whether Pilon expected to pay any. If they did,

both were disappointed. Danny never asked for it, and
Pilon never offered it.
'The two friends were often together. Let Pilon come

by a jug of wine or a piece of meat and Danny was wre

^ 35 ^

to drop in to visit. And, if Danny were lucky or astute

in the same way, Pilon spent a riotous night with him.

Poor Pilon would have paid the money if he ever had
any, but he never did have-not long enough to locate

Danny. Pilon was an honest man. It worried him sometimes to think of Danny’s goodness and his own poverty.

One night he had a dollar, acquired in a manner so
astoimding that he tried to foi^et it immediately for
fear the memory might make him mad.

A man in front

of the San Carlos hotel had put the dollar in his hand,
saying,

“Run down and get four bottles of ginger-ale.

The hotel is out.” Such things were almost miracles,
Pilon thought.

One should take them on faith, not

worry and question them. He took the dollar up the
road to give to Danny, but on the way he bought a gallon of wine, and with the wine he lured two plump girls
into his house.

Danny, walking by, heard the noise and joyfully went
in.

Pilon fell into his arms and placed everything at

Danny's disposal. And later, after Danny had helped to
dispose of one of the girk and half of the wine, there

was a really fine fight. Danny lost a tooth, and Pilon

had his shirt tom off. The girls stood shrieking by, and'

^ 36 ^

I’icked

whichever

man happened to be down. At last

Danny got up off the floor and butted one of the girls
in the stomach, and she went out the door croaking like

a frog. The other girl stole two cooking pots and fol-

lowed her.
For a little while, Danny and Pilon wept over the
perfidy of women.

“Tliou knowest not what bitches women are,” Danny
said wisely.
“I do know,” said Pilon.

"Thou knowest not.”
“I do know.”

"Liar.”

There was another fight, but not a very good one.
After that. Pilon

felt

better about the unpaid rent

Had he not been host to his landlord?

A number of months passed. Pilon began again to
worry about the rent. And as time went by, the worry

grew intolerable. At last in desperation he worked a

whole day cleaning squids for Chin Kee and made two
dollars.

In the evening he tied his red handkerchief

around his neck, put on his father’s revered hat and

^ 37

started

up the hill to pay Danny the two dollars on

account.

But on the way he bought two gallons of wine. "It
is better so,”

he thought. “If I give him hard money, it

does not express how warmly I feel toward my friend.

But a present, now. And I will tell him the two gallons
cost five dollars.” This was silly, and Pilon knew it, but

he indulged himself. No one in Monterey better knew
the price of wine than Danny.

Pilon was proceeding happily. His mind was made

up; his nose pointed straight toward Danny’s house.

His feet moved, not quickly, but steadily, in the proper
direction. Under each arm he carried a paper bag, and

a gallon of wine was in each bag.
It was

purple dusk, that sweet time when the day’s

sleeping is over, and the evening of pleasure and conversation has not begun.

The pine trees were very

black against the sky, and

all

objects

on the ground

were obscured with dark; but the sky was as mournfully
bright as memory. The gulls flew lazily home to the sea
locks after a day’s visit to the fish canneries of Monterey.
,

Pilon was a lover of beauty and a mystic. He raised
his fa.ce into the sky and his soul arose out of him into

the sun’s afterglow. That not too perfect Pilon, who
plotted and fought,

who drank and cursed, trudged

slowly on; but a wistful and shining Pilon went up to

the sea gulls where they bathed on sensitive wings in
the evening. That Pilon was beautiful, and his thoughts

were unstained with

selfishness

and

lust.

And

his

thoughts are good to know.

“Our Father is in the evening,” he thought. “These
birds are flying across the forehead of the Father. Dear
birds, dear sea gulls, how I love you all. Your slow wings

stroke my heart as the hand of a gentle master strokes

the full stomach of a sleeping dog, as the hand of Christ
stroked the heads of

little

children.

Dear birds,” he

thought, “fly to our Lady of Sweet Sorrows with my

open heart.” And then he said the loveliest words he
knew, “Ave Maria, gratia plena

”

The feet of the bad Pilon had stopped moving. In
truth the bad Pilon for the moment had ceased to exist.
(Hear this, recording angel!) There was, nor is, nor
ever has been a purer soul than Pilon’s at that moment.
Galvez’ bad bulldog came to Pilon’s deserted legs stand-

ing alone in the dark. And Galvez’ bulldog sniflEed and

went away without biting the legs.

^ 39

A soul washed and saved is a soul doubly in danger,
for everything in the world conspires against such
soul,

"Even the straws under my knees,”

a

says Saint

Augustine, “shout to distract me from prayer.”
Pilon’s soul was not even proof against his own memories; for, as he watched the birds, he remembered that

Mrs. Pastano used sea gulls sometimes in her tamales,

and

that

memory made him hungry, and hunger

tumbled his soul out of the sky. Pilon moved on, once

more a cunning mixture of good and evil. Galvez’ bad
bulldog turned snarling and stalked back, sorry now
that he

had let go such a perfect chance at Pilon’s

legs.

Pilon hunched his arms to ease the weight of the
bottles.
It is

a fact verified and recorded in many histories

that the soul capable of the greatest good is also capable

Who is there more impious than a
backsliding priest? Who more carnal than a recent vir-

of the greatest evil.

gin? This, however, may be a matter of appearance,
Pilon, just back from Heaven, was, although he did

not know it, singularly receptive of every bitter wind,

toward every evil influence that crowded the night

^ 40

about him. True, his feet still moved toward Danny’s
house, but there was neither intention nor conviction
in them. They awaited the littlest signal to turn about.

Already Pilon was thinking how stupendously drunk

he could get on two gallons of wine, and more, how
long he could stay drunk.
It was almost dark now.

The dirt road was no longer

visible,

nor the ditches on either side. No moral con*

elusion

is

drawn from the fact that at this moment,

when Pilon’s impulses were balanced as precariously as
a feather, between generosity and selfishness, at this
very moment Pablo Sanchez happened to be sitting in
the ditch at the side of the road wishing he had a cigarette and a glass of wine.

Ah, the prayers of the millions, how they must fight

and destroy each other on their way to the throne of
God.
Pablo first heard footsteps, then saw a blurred figure,

and then recognized Pilon. “Ai, amigo" he called enthusiastically.

“What great burden is it thou carriest?”

Pilon stopped dead and faced the ditch. “I thought

you were in jail,” he said severely. “I heard about a
goose."

^ 42

“So I was, Pilon,” Pablo said jocularly. “But I was
not well received. The judge said the sentence did me

no good, and the police said I ate more than the allowance for three men. And so,” he finished proudly, “I

am on parole.”
Pilon was saved from selfishness. True, he did not
take the wine to Danny’s house, but instantly he invited

Pablo to share it at the rented house. If two generous
paths branch from the highroad of life and only one can

be followed, who is to judge which is best?
Pilon and Pablo entered the

little

house joyfully.

Pilon lighted a candle and produced two fruit jars for
glasses.

"Health!” said Pablo.
“Salud!" said Pilon.

And in a few moments, “Salud!” said Pablo.
"Mud in your eye!” said Pilon.
They rested a little while. "Su servidor,” said Pilon.

“Down the rat-hole,” said Pablo.

Two gallons is a great deal of wine, even for two
paisanos. Spiritually the jugs

may be graduated thus:

Just below the shoulder of the first bottle, serious and

omcentrated conversation.

Two inches farther down.

^ 43

sweetly sad memory.

Three inches more, thoughts of

old and satisfactory loves. An inch, thoughts of old and
bitter loves.

Bottom of the first jug, general and un-

directed sadness. Shoulder of the second jug, black, un-

holy despondency. Two fingers down, a song of death
or longing. A thumb, every other song each one knows.

The graduations stop here, for the trail splits and there
is

no

certainty.

From

this

point

on anything can

happen.

But let us go back to the first mark, which says serious and concentrated conversation, for it was at that
place tliat Pilon made his coup.

“Pablo," he said, “dost thou never get tired of sleep-

ing in ditches, wet and homeless, friendless and alone?”

“No,” said Pablo.
Pilon mellowed his voice persuasively. “So I thought,

my friend, when I was a dirty gutter-dog, I too, was
content, for I did not know how sweet a little house is,

and a roof, and a garden. Ah, Pablo, this is indeed
living.”
“It’s pretty nice,” Pablo agreed.

Pilon pounced. “See, Pablo, how would you like to
rent part of my house? There would never be the cold

^ 44 ^

ground for you any more. Never the hard sand under
the wharf with crabs getting in your shoes.

How would

you like to live here with me?”
“Sure,” said Pablo.

“Look, you will pay only fifteen dollars a month! And

you may use all the house except my bed. and all the
garden.

Think of it, Pablo! And if some one should

write you a letter, he will have some place to send it to.”
“Sure,” said Pablo. “That’s swclL”

Pilon sighed with relief. He had not realized how the

debt to Danny rode on his shoulders. The fact that he

was fairly sure Pablo would never pay any rent did not
mitigate his triumph. If

Danny should ever ask for

money, Pilon could say, "I will pay when Pablo pays..”

They moved on to the next graduation, and Pilon
remembered how happy he had been when he was a
little boy.

“No care then, Pablo. I knew not sin. I was

very happy.”

“We have never been happy since,” Pablo agreed
sadly.

^ 45 ^

IV
How Jesus Maria Corcoran^ a good man, became an
unwilling vehicle of evil.

Life

passed

smoothly on

for Pilon and Pablo. In the morning when the sun was

up clear of the pine trees, when the blue bay rippled
and sparkled below them, they arose slowly and
thoughtfully from their beds.
It is a time of quiet joy, the sunny morning.

When

the glittery dew is on the mallow weeds, each leaf holds
a jewel which is beautiful if not valuable. This is no

time for hurry or for bustle. Thoughts are slow and

deep and golden in the morning.
Pablo and Pilon in their blue jeans and blue shirts

walked in comradeship into the gulch behind the house,

and after a little time they returned to sit in the sun on
the front porch, to listen to the fish horns on the street*

^ 47

of Monterey, to discuss in wandering, sleepy tones the

doings of Tortilla Flat; for there are a thousand

cli-

maxes on Tortilla Flat for every day the world wheels
through.

They were at peace there on the porch. Only their
toes wriggled on the warm boards when the flies landed

on them.
"If all the

dew were diamonds,” Pablo said, "we

would be very rich. We would be drunk all our lives.”

But Pilon, on whom the curse of realism lay uneasily,
added. “Everybody would have too

many diamonds.

Theie would be no price for them, but wine always
costs money. If only it would rain wine for a day, now,

and we had a tank to catch it in.”
"But good wme,” interjected Pablo, "Not rotgut swill
like the last you got.”

“I didn’t pay for it," said Pilon. "Some one hid it in

the grass by the dance hall.

What can you expect of

wine you find?”

They sat and waved their hands listlessly at the flies.
"Cornelia Ruiz cut up the black Mexican yesterday,”
Pflon observed.

^ 48

Pablo raised his eyes in mild interest “Fight?” he
asked.

“Oh no, the black one did not know Cornelia got a
new man yesterday, and he tried to come in. So Cornelia cut him.”

“He should have known,” Pablo said virtuously.
“Well, he was down in the town when Cornelia got
her new man. The black one just tried to go in through
the window when she locked the door.”

“The black one is a fool,” said Pablo. “Is he dead?”
“Oh, no. She just cut him up a little bit on the amis.
Cornelia was not angry. She just didn’t want the black

one to come in.”
“Cornelia is not a very steady woman,” said Pablol’

"But still she has masses sung for her father, ten years
dead.”

“He will need them,” Pilon observed. “He was a bad
man and never went to jail for it, and he never went to
confession. When old Ruiz was dying, the priest came

to give him solace, and Ruiz confessed. Cornelia says
that priest was white as buckskin when he came out of

the sickroom. But afterwards that priest said he didn’t
believe half what Ruiz confessed.”

Pablo, with a cat-like stroke, killed a fly that landed

on his knee. “Ruiz was always a liar,” he said. “That
soul will need plenty of masses.

But do you think a

mass has virtue when the money for that mass comes out
of men’s pockets while they sleep in wine at Cornelia’s

house?”

"A mass is a mass,” said Pilon. “Where you get twobits is no interest to the man who sells you a glass of
wine. And where a mass comes from is of no interest to
Cod. He just likes them, the same as you like wine.
Father Murphy used to go fishing all the time, and for

months die Holy Sacrament tasted like mackerel, but
that did not

make it less holy. These things are for

priests to explain.

They are nothing for us to worry

about. I wonder where we could get some eggs to eat.
It would be good to eat an egg now.”

Pablo tilted his hat down over his eyes to keep the

sun from bothering him. “Charlie Meeler told me that

Danny is with Rosa Martin, that Portagee girl.”
Pilon sat upright in alarm.

“Maybe that girl will

want to marry Danny. Those Portagees always want to
marry, and they love money. Maybe when they are married Danny will bother us about the rent.

^ 50

That Rost)

will

want new dresses. All women do. I knot/ them.”

Pablo, too, looked annoyed. “Maybe if we went and

—

talked to Danny

” he suggested.

“Maybe Danny has some eggs,” said Pilon. “Those
chickens of Mrs. Morales are good layers.”

They put on their shoes and walked slowly toward
Danny’s house.
Pilon stooped and picked up a beer bottle cap and

cursed and threw it down. “Some evil man has left it
there to deceive people,” he said.
“I tried it last night,” said Pablo. He looked into a

yard where the green com was ripe, and made a mental
note of its ripeness.

They found Danny sitting on his front porch, behind
the rose bush, wriggling his toes to keep the flies off
“Ai, amigos/’ he greeted them listlessly.

They sat down beside him and took off their hats and
their shoes. Danny took out a sack of tobacco and some

papers and passed them to Pilon. Pilon looked mildly
shocked, but made no comment.

“Cornelia Ruiz cut up the black Mexican,” he said.
“I heard about it,” said Danny.

^5

^

Pablo spoke acidly. “These women, there is no virtue
in them any more.”
“It is dangerous to lie with them,” said Pilon. “I have

heard that there is one young Portagee girl here on the
Flat who can give a man something to remember her
by, if he goes to the trouble to get it.”

Pablo made disapproving clucking noises with his
tongue. He spread his hands in front of him. “What is

a man to do?” he asked. “Is there no one to trust?”

They watched Danny’s face, and saw no alarm appear
there.

"This girl’s name is Rosa,” said Pilon. “I would not
say her last name.”

“Oh, you mean Rosa Martin,” Danny observed with
very little interest. “Well, what can you expect of a
Portagee?”

Pablo and Pilon sighed with relief.

"How are Mrs. Morales’ chickens getting along?”
Pilon asked casually.

Danny shook his head sadly. “Every one of those
chickens is dead. Mrs. Morales put up some string-beans
in jars, and the jars blew up, and she fed the beans to

the chickens, and those chickens all died, every one.”

^ 52

“Where are those chickens now?” Pablo demanded

Danny waved two fingers back and forth in negation
“Some one told Mrs. Morales not to eat those chickens
or she would be sick, but we scraped the insides good

and sold them to the butcher.”
“Has anybody died?” Pablo asked.
“No.

I guess those

chickens would have been

all

right.”

“Perhaps you bought a little wine with the money

from those chickens?” Pilon suggested.

Danny smiled cynically at him. “Mrs Morales did,
and I went to her house last night. That is a pretty

woman in some lights, and not so old. either.”
The alarm came back to Pablo and Pilon.

“My cousin Weelie says she is fifty years old,” Pilon
said excitedly.

Danny spread his hands. “What is it how old in years
she is?” he observed philosophically. “She is lively, that
one. She owns her house and has two hundred dollars
in the bank.” Then Danny became a little embarrassed.

“I would like to make a present to Mrs. Morales.”
Pilon and Pablo regarded their

^ 53 £5

feet,

and tried by

”

strenuous mental effort to ward off what was coming.

But their effort had no value.
“If I had a little money,” said Danny, "I would buy

her a box of big candy.” He looked meaningly at his
tenants, but neither one answered him. “I would need

only a dollar or two,” he suggested.

“Chin Kee is drying squids,” Pilon observed. “Perhaps you could cut squids for half a day.”

Danny spoke pointedly. “It would not look well for
a man tvho owns two houses to cut squids. But perhaps

—

if a little rent were ever paid

Pilon arose angrily. “Always the rent,” he cried. “You

would force us into the streets— into the gutters, while
you sleep in your soft bed. Come, Pablo,” Pilon said
angrily, “we will get money for this miser, this Jew.”

The two of them stalked off.
"Where will we get money?” Pablo asked.
"I don't know,” said Pilon.
again.”

“Maybe he won't ask

But the inhuman demand had cut deep into

their mental peace. “We will call him ‘Old Jew’ when

we see him,” said Pilon. “We have been his friends for
years.

When he was in need, we fed him. When he was

cold, we clothed him.”

^ 54

"When was that?” Pablo asked.
“Well, we would have, if he needed anything and we
had it. That is the kind of friends we were to him.

And now he crushes our friendship into the gpround for
a box of big candy to give to an old fat woman.”

“Candy is not good for people,” said Pablo.
So much emotion had exhausted Pilon. He sat down
in the ditch beside the road and put his chin in his

hands and "was disconsolate.
Pablo sat down too, but he only did it to rest, for
his friendship with Danny was not as old and beautiful
as Pilon’s was.

The bottom of the ditcfi was choked with dry grass
and bushes. Pilon, staring downward in his sorrow and
resentment, saw a human arm sticking out from under
a bush.

And then, beside the arm, a half-full gallon

bottle of wine.

He clutched Pablo’s arm and pointed.

Pablo stared. "Maybe he is dead, Pilon.”
Pilon had got his breath and his fine clear vision
again. “If he is dead, the wine will do him no good. He
can’t be buried with it.”

The arm stirred, swept back the bushes, and disclosed
the frowsy iace and red stubble beard of Jesus Maria

^ 55

j

Corcoran. “Ai, Pilon. Ai, Pablo,” he said hazily. "Que

tomas^”
Pilon leaped down the bank on him. “Amigo Jesus

Marial you are not well!”
Jesus Maria smiled sweetly. “Just drunk,” he mur-

mured. He rose to his knees. “Come have a drink, my
friends. Drink deep.

There is plenty more

”

Pilon tilted the bottle over his elbow. He swallowed
four times and over a pint

left

the jug.

Then Pablo

took the bottle from him, and Pablo played with it as

a cat plays with a feather. He polished the mouth with
his sleeve.

He smelled the wine. He took three or four

preliminary sips and let a few drops run all around his

mouth, to tantalize himself. At last, “Madre de Dios,

que vino!” he said. He raised the jug and die red wine
gurgled happily down his throat.
Pilon’s hand was out long before Pablo had to breathe

again. Pilon turned a soft and admiring countenance to
his friend Jesus Maria. “Hast thou discovered a treasure

in the woods?” he asked.

“Has some great man died

and named thee in his will, my little friend?”
Jesus Maria was a humanitarian, and kindness

always in him.

was

He cleared his throat and spat. "Give

^ 56 ^

me a drink,” he said. “My throat is dry. I will tell you
how it was.” He drank dreamily, like a man who has
so much wine that he ca^n take his time in drinking it,

can even spill a little without remorse. “I was sleeping

on the beach two nights ago,” he said. “Out on the
beach near Seaside. In the night the little waves washed
a rowboat to the shore. Oh, a nice little rowboat, and
the oars were there. I got in and rowed it down to Monterey. It was easily worth twenty dollars, but trade was

slow, and I only got seven.”

“Thou hast money left?” Pilon put in excitedly.
“I am telling you how it was,” Jesus Maria said with

some

dignity.

“I bought two gallons of

wine and

brought them up here to the woods, and then I went
to walk with Arabella Gross. For her I bought one pair

of silk drawers in Monterey. She liked

them—so soft

they were, and so pink. And then I bought a pint of

whisky for Arabella, and then after a while

we met

some soldiers and she went away with them.”
“Oh, the thief of a good man’s money!” Pilon cried
in horror.

“No,” said Jesus Maria dreamily. “It was time she

went anyway. And then I came here and werit to sleep.”

^ 57 ^

“Then thou hast no more money?”
“I don’t

know,” said Jesus Maria. “I will see.” He

fished in his pocket

and brought out three crumpled

dollar bills and a dime. “To-night,” he said, “I will buy
for Arabella Gross one of those little things that goes

around higher up.”

“You mean the little silk pockets on a string?”
“Yes,” said Jesus Maria, “and not so

little

as

you

might think, either,” He coughed to clear his throat.
Instantly Pilon was filled with solicitude. “It

is

the

night air,” he said. "It is not good to sleep out in the

open. Come, Pablo, we will take him to our house and

cure this cold of his. The malady of the lungs has a

good start, but we will cure it.”

“What are you talking about?” said Jesus Maria. “I’m
ill

right.”

“So you think,” said Pilon. "So Rudolfo Kelling
thought. And you yourself went to his funeral a month
ago. So Angelina Vasquez thought. She died last week.”

Jesus Maria was frightened.

“What do you think is

the matter?”
"It is sleeping in this night air,” Pilon said sagely.

"Your lungs will not stand it.”

^ 58 ^

Pablo wrapped the wine jug in a big weed, so disguising it that any one passing would have been con-

sumed with curiosity Until he knew what that weed
contained.

Pilon walked beside Jesus Maria, touching him now

and then under the elbow to remind him that he was
not a well man. They took him to their house and laid

him on a cot, and although the day was warm, they
covered him with an old comforter. Pablo spoke movingly of those poor ones who writhed and suffered with
tuberculosis. And then Pilon pitched his voice to sweet-

He spoke with reverence of the joy of living in a
little house. When the night was far gone, and all the
ness.

talk and wine were gone, and outside the deadly mists

clung to the ground like the ghosts of giant leeches,

then one did not go out to lie in the sickly damp of a
gulch.

No, one got into a deep, soft, warm bed and

slept like a little child.

Jesus Maria went to sleep at this point. Pilon and

Pablo had to wake him up and give him a drink. Then
Pilon spoke njovingly of the mornings when one lay in
one’s warm nest until the sun was high enough to be of

^ 59 ^

some use. One did not go shivering about in the dawn,
beating one’s hands to keep them from freezing.

At last Pilon and Pablo moved in on Jesus Maria as
two silent hunting Airedales converge on their prey.

They rented the use of their house to Jesus for fifteen
dollars

a month.

He accepted happily. They shook

hands all around. The jug came out of its weed. Pilon

drank deeply, for he knew his hardest task was before
him. He said it very gently and casually, while Jesus

Maria was drinking out of the bottle.

“And you will pay only three dollars on account
now,”
Jesus Maria put down the bottle and looked at him

in horror. “No,” he exploded. “I made a promise to

Arabella Gross to buy one of tliose little things. I will

pay the rent when it is time.”
Pilon knew he had blundered.

“When you lay on

that beach at Seaside, God floated the little rowboat to

you. Do you think the good God did it so you could

buy silk drawers for a cannery slut? Nol God did it so
you would not die from sleeping on the ground in the

Do you think God is interested in Arabella’s
breasts? And besides, we will take a two dollar deposit,”

cold.

^ 6o

he went on. “For one dollar you can get one of those
things big enough to hold the udders of a cow.”
Still Jesus

Maria protested.

“I will tell you,” Pilon

went on, “unless we pay

Danny two dollars we shall all be turned into the street,
and it will be your fault. You will have it on your soul
that we sleep in ditches.”

Under so many shots, coming from so many directions, Jesus Maria Corcoran succumbed.

He passed two

of the crumpled bills to Pilon.

And now the tense feeling went out of the room, and
peace and quiet and a warm deep comradeship took its
place. Pilon relaxed.

Pablo took the comforter back

to his own bed, and conversation sprang up.

“We must take this money to Danny.”
Their first appetite over, they were sipping the wine
out of fruit jars now.

“What is this great need Danny has for two dollars?”
Jesus Maria asked.

Pilon grew confidential. His hands came into play
like twin moths, restrained only by his wrists and arms

from flying out the door. "Danny, our friend, is taking

up with Mrs. Morales. Oh, don’t think Danny is a fiool.

^ 6i If

Mrs. Morales has two hundred dollars in the bank.

Danny wants to buy .a box of big candy

for Mrs.

Morales.”

“Candy is not good for people,” Pablo observed. “It
makes their teeth ache.”

“That is up to Danny,” said Jesus Maria. "If he wants
to ache Mrs. Morales’ teetji, that is his business. What

do we care for Mrs. Morales’ teeth?”

A cloud of anxiety had settled on Pilon’s face. “But,”
he interposed sternly, “if our friend Danny takes big
candy to Mrs. Morales, he will eat some too. So it is
the teeth of our friend that will ache.”

Pablo shook his head anxiously. “It would be a bad
thing if Danny’s friends, on whom he depends, should

bring about the aching of his teeth.”

“What shall we do, then?” asked Jesus Maria, although he and every one else knew exactly what they

would do. They waited politely, each one for another,
to make the inevitable suggestion. The silence ran on.

Pilon and Pablo

felt

that the suggestion should not

come from them, since, by some lines of reasoning, they
cnight be considered interested parties. Jesus Maria kept
silence in duty to his hosts, but when their silence made

^ 6e ^

him aware of what was required of him, he came in
stantly into the breach.

“A gallon of wine makes a nice present for a lady,”
he suggested in a musing tone.
Pilon and Pablo were astonished at his brilliance

“We can tell Danny it would be better for his teeth to
get wine.”

“But maybe Danny will pay no heed to our %varning.
If you give money to that Danny, you can’t tell what he

will do witli it.

He might buy candy anyway, and tlien

all our time and worry are wasted.”

They had made of Jesus Maria their feeder of lines,
their opener of uneasy situations. “Maybe if we buy the

wine ourselves and then give it to Danny tliere is no
danger,” he suggested.

“That

is

the thing,” cried Pilon.

“Now you have

it.”

Jesus Maria smiled modestly at being given credit
for this. He felt that sooner or later this principle would

have been promulgated by some one in the room.
Pablo poured the last little bit of wine into the fruit
jars

and they drank tiredly after their effort. It was a

matter of pride to them that the idea had been arrived

^ 63

at

so logically,

and in such a philanthropic came.

“Now I am hungry,” said Pablo.
Pilon got up and went to the door and looked at

the sun. “It is after noon,” he said. “Pablo and I will

go to Torrelli’s to get the wine, while you, Jesus Maria,

go into Monterey for something to

eat.

Maybe Mrs.

Bruno, on the wharf, will give you a fish. Maybe you

can get a little bread seme place.”
“I would rather go with you,” said Jesus Maria, for

he suspected that another sequence, just as logical, and
just as inevitable, was beginning to grow in the heads

of his friends.

“No, Jesus Maria ” they said firmly. “It is now two
o’clock, or

o’clock

thing to

about

that.

In an hour

it

will

be three

Then we will meet you here and have someeat.

And maybe a little glass of wine to go

with it.”
Jesus Maria started for Monterey very reluctantly,

but Pablo and Pilon walked happily

toward Torrelli’s house.

^ 64

down the hill

V
How St. Francis turned the tide and put a gentle
punishment on Pilon and Pablo and Jesus Maria.

THE

afternoon came down as

imperceptibly as age comes to a happy man.

A little gold

entered into the sunlight. The bay became bluer and

dimpled with shore-wind ripples. Those lonely fisher-

men who believe that the fish bite at high tide left their
rocks, and their places were taken by others, who were
convinced that the fish bite at low tide.

At three o’clock the wind veered around and blew
softly in from the bay, bringing all manner of fine kelp

odors. The menders of nets in the vacant lots of Mon-

terey put

down their spindles and rolled cigarette.

'Through the streets of the town, fat ladies, in whose
eyes lay the weariness and the wisdom one sees so often

in the eyes of pigs,

were tmndled in overpowered

^ 65 ^

mcNtor cars toward tea and gin fizzes at the Hotel Del

Monte, On Alvarado Street, Hugo Machado, the tailor,
put a sign in his shop door, “Back in Five Minutes,”

and went home for the day. The pines waved slowly
and, voluptuously. The hens in a hundred hen yards
coipplained in placid voices of their evil lot.

Pilon and Pablo sat under a pink rose of Castile in
Tcgrrelh’s yard,

and quietly drank wine and let the

after^on grow on them as gradually as hair grows.
“It is just as well that

we do not take two gallons

of wine to Danny,” said Pilon. “He is a man who knows
little restraint

in drinking.”

Pablo agreed. “Danny looks healthy,” he said, “but
it is just such people that you hear of dying every

day.

Look at Rudolfo Kelling. Look at Angelina Vasquez.”
Pilon’s realism arose mildly to the surface. “Rudolfo

feU into the quarry above Pacific Grove,” he observed
in mild reproof. “Angelina ate a bad can of fish. But,"

he continued kindly, “I know what you mean. And there
are plenty of people who die through abuse of wine.”

All Monterey began to

make gradual

instinctive

pr4^}arations against the night. Mrs. Guttierez cut little

^ 66 ^

chiles

into her enchilada sauce.

Rupert Hogan, the

seller of spirits, added water to his gin and put it away

to

be served after midnight.

And he shook a little

pepper into his early evening whisky. At El “Pziseo
dancing pavilion, Bullet Rosendale opened a carton of
pretzels and arranged them like coarse brown lace on

The Palace Drug Company
wound up its awnings. A little group of men who had
the big courtesy plates.

spent the afternoon in front of the post ofEce, greeting
their friends, moved toward the station to see the Del

Monte Express from San Francisco come in. The^sea
gulls arose glutted

from the fish cannery beaches and

(lew toward the sea rocks. Lines of pelicans

pounded

doggedly over the water wherever they go to spend the
night.

On the purse-seine fishing boats the Italian' men

folded their nets over the big rollers. Little Miss Alma
Alvarez,

who was ninety years

old,

took her (Mily

bouquet of pink geraniums to the Virgin on the outer
wall of the church of San Carlos. In the neighboring

and Methodist village of Pacific Grove the W.C.TtU.
met for tea and discussion, listened while a little laSy
described the vice and prostitution of Monterey with

energy and color. She thought a committee should visit

^ 67

these resorts to see exactly how terrible conditions really

were. They had gone over the situation so often, and

they needed new facts.

The sun went westering and took on an orange blush.
Under the rose bush in Torrelli’s yard Pablo and Pilon

mm
i

finished the first gallon of wine. Torrelli came out of
his house and passed out of the yard without seeing his

erstwhile customers.

They waited until he was out of

sight on the way to Monterey;

whereupon Pablo and

Pilon went into the house, and with a conscious knowl-

edge of their art, cozened their supper out of Mrs.
Torrelli. They slapped her on the buttocks and called

her a “Butter Duck” and took little courteous liberties

with her person, and finally

left her,

flattered

and

slightly tousled.

Now it was evening in Monterey, and the lights went
on. The windows glowed softly. The Monterey Theater

began to spell “Children of Hell— Children of Hell”
over and over with its lights.

A small but fanatic group

of men who believe that the fish bite in the evening

took their places on the cold sea rocks.

A little fc^

drifted through the streets and hung about the chimneys, and a fine smell of burning pine wood filled the
air.

Pablo and Pilon went back to their rose bush and sat

on the ground, but they were not as contented as tliey
had been. “It is cool here,” said Pilon, and he took a
drink of wine to warm himself.

“We should go to our own house where it is warm,”
said Pablo.

“But there is no wood for the stove."
“Well,” said Pablo, “if you will take the wine, I
will meet you at the comer of the street.”

And he did,

in about half an hour.

Pilon waited patiently, for he knew there are some

^ 69 ^

thing? even one’s friends cannot help with.

While he

waitecl, Pilon kept a watchful eye aimed down the street

in the direction Torrelli had taken, for Torrelli was a
forceful

man to whom explanations, no matter how

car^ully considered nor how beautifully phrased, were
diaff.

Moreover, Torrelli had, Pilon knew, the

Italians’

exaggerated and wholly quixotic ideal of mar-

as

ital relations.

But Pilon watched in vain. No Torrelli

came brutally home. In a little while Pablo joined him,
and Pilon noticed with admiration and satisfaction that
he carried an armful of pine sticks from Torrelli’s wood
pile.

Pablo made no comment on his recent adventure
until they arrived at their house.

Then he echoed

Danny’s words, “A lively one, that Butter Duck.”
Pilon nodded his head in the dark and spoke with

a quiet philosophy. “It

is

seldom that one finds

all

things at one market—wine, food, love and fire wood.

We must remember Torrelli, Pablo, my friend. There
is a man to know. We must take him a little present
sometime.”
Pilon built a roaring fire in the cast-iron stove. The

two friends drew their chairs close and held their fruit

^ 70 ^

jars to the heat to warm the wine a little.

This night

the light was holy, for Pablo had bought a candle to

bum for San Francisco. Something had distracted his
attention before that sacred plan

had consummated.

Now the little wax taper burned beautifully in an
abalone shell, and it threw the shadows of Pablo and
Pilon on the wall and made them dance.
“I wonder where that Jesus Maria has gone,” Pilon

observed.

“He promised he would come back long ago,” said
Pablo. “I do not know whether that is a man to trust

or not.”

“Perhaps some little thing happened to detain him,
Pablo. Jesus Maria, with that red beard and that kind

heart

is

nearly always in some kind of trouble with

ladies.”

“His is a grasshopper brain,” said Pablo. “He sings

and plays and jumps. There is no seriousness in him.”

They had no great time to wait. They had barely
started their second fruit jar of wine when Jesus Maria

staggered in. He held each side of the door to steady
himself. His shirt was tom and his face was bloody. One

eye showed dark and ominous in the dancing candlelight.

Pablo and Pilon rushed to him. “Our friend! He is
hurt. He has fallen from a clifi. He has been run over

by a train!” There was not the slightest tone of satire,
but Jesus Maria knew it for the most deadly kind of
satire.

He glared at them out of the eye which still

had some volition hi such matters.
“Both thy mothers were udderless cows,” he

re-

marked.

They fell back from him in horror at the vulgarity
of the curse. “Our friend is wandering in his mind,”

“The bone of his head has been broken.”
"Pour him a little wine, Pablo.”
Jesus Maria sat morosely by the fire and caressed his
fruit jar, while his friends waited patiently for

an ex-

planation of the tragedy. But Jesus Maria seemed content to leave his friends in ignorance of the mishap.

Although Pilon cleared his throat several times, and
although Pablo looked at Jesus Maria with eyes which
offered sympathy

and understanding, Jesus Maria sat

sullenly and glared at the stove

and at the wine and

at the blessed candle, until at length his discourteous

^ 72

reticence drove Pilon to

an equal discourtesy. After-

wards he did not see how he could have done it.

“Those soldiers again?” he asked.
“Yes,” Jesus Maria growled. “This time they came

too soon.”

“There must have been twenty of them to have used
thee so,” Pablo observed, for the good of his friend’s
spirit. “Every one knows thou art a bad

man in a fight.”

And Jesus Maria did look a little happier then.
“They were four,” he said. “Arabella Gross helped,
too. She hit me on the head with a rock.”

Pilon felt a wave of moral resentment rising within

him. “I would not remind thee,” he said severely, “how
thy friends warned thee against this cannery slob.” He

wondered whether he had warned Jesus Maria, and
seemed to remember that he had.
“These cheap white girls are vicious, my friend,”
Pablo broke in. “But did you give her that little thing
that goes around?”

Jesus Maria reached into his pocket and brought out

a crumpled pink rayon brassiere.

“The time had not

come,” he said. “I was just getting to that point; and
besides, we had not come into the woods yet.”

^ 73 ^

Pilon

snifiEed

the air

and shook his head, but not

without a certain sad tolerance. “Thou hast been drinking whisky

”

Jesus Maria nodded.

“Where did this whisky come from?”
“From those soldiers,” said Jesus Maria. “They had
it

under a culvert. Arabella knew it was there, and she

toM me. But those soldiers saw us with the bottle.”

The story was gradually taking shape. Pilon liked it
this way. It

ruined a story to have

it

all

come out

The good story lay in half-told things which
must be filled in out of the hearer’s own experience. He
quickly.

took the pink brassiere from Jesus Maria’s lap and ran
his fingers over it, and his eyes went to musing. But in

a moment tliey shone with a joyous light.
“I know,” he cried. “We’ll give this thing to Danny
as a gift to Mrs. Morales.”

Every one except Jesus Maria applauded the idea,

and he

felt

himself hopelessly outnumbered. Pablo,

with a delicate understanding of the defeat, filled up
Jesus Maria’s fruit jar.

When a little time had passed, all three men began
to smile. Pilon told a very funny story of a thing that

^ 74 ^

had happened to his father. Good spirits returned to
the company.

They sang. Jesus Maria did a sh ufflin g

dance to prove he was not badly hurt. The wine went

down and down in the jug, but before it was gone the
three friends grew sleepy. Pilon and Pablo staggered
ofiE to bed,

and Jesus Maria lay comfortably on the floor,

beside the stove.

The fire died down. The house was filled with the
deep sounds of slumber. In the front room only one
thing moved. The blessed candle darted its little spear-

pointed flame up and down with incredible rapidity.
Later, this little candle gave Pilon

and Pablo and

Jesus Maria some ethical things to think about. Simple
small rod of wax with a string through it: Such a thing,

you would say, is answerable to certain physical laws,

and to none other. Its conduct, you would think, was
guaranteed by certain principles of heat and combustion. You light the wick; the wax is caught and drawn

up the wick; the candle burns a number of hours, goes
out, and that is all. The incident is finished. In a little

while the candle is forgotten, and then, of course, it
has never existed.

Have you foigotten that this candle was blessed? That

in a

moment of conscience or perhaps pure religious

exaltation, it was designed by Pablo for San Francisco?

Here is the principle which takes the waxen rod outside the jurisdiction of physics.

The candle aimed its spear of light at heaven, like
an artist who consumes himself to become divine. The
candle grew shorter and shorter.

A wind sprang up

outside and sifted through the cracks in the wall. The

candle sagged sideways.

A silken calendar, bearing the

face of a lovely girl looking out of the heart of an

American Beauty rose, floated out a little distance from
the wall. It came into the spear of flame. The fire licked

up the silk and raced toward the ceiling. A loose piece
of wallpaper caught fire and fell flaming into a bundle

of newspapers.

^ 76 ^

In the sky, saints and martyrs looked on with set and
unforgiving faces. The candle was blessed. It belonged
to Saint Francis. Saint Francis will have a big candle
in its place to-night.
If it were possible to judge depth of sleep, it could be

said with justice that Pablo, whose culpable action was

responsible for the fire, slept even more soundly than
his two friends. But since tliere is no gauge, it can only

be said that he slept very very soundly.

The flames ran up the walls and found little holes
in the roof, and leaked through into the night. The
house filled with the roar of fire. Jesus Maria turned
over uneasily and began, in his sleep, to take off his
coat.

Then a flaming shingle dropped in his face. He

leaped

up with a cry, and stood shocked at the fire

that raged about him.

“Pilon!” he shrieked. “Pablo!” He ran into the other

room, pulled his friends out of bed and pushed them
out of the house. Pilon still grasped the pink brassiere
in his fingers.

They stood outside the burning house, and looked
in the open fire-curtained door. They could see the jug

^ 77 ^

standing on the table with a good two inches of wine
in it.

Pilon sensed the savage incipient heroism of Jesus

Maria. "Do not do it,” he shouted. “It must be lost in

the fire as a punishment on us for leaving it.”

The cry of sirens came to them, and the roar of
trucks climbing the hill in second gear from the fire

house in Monterey. The big red fire vehicles drew near

and their searchlights played among the pine trunks.
Pilon turned hastily to Jesus Maria.

"Run and tell

Darmy his house is burning. Run quickly, Jesus Maria.”

“Why don't you go?”
“Listen,” said Pilon. “Danny does not know you are

one who rents his house. He may be a little bit angry
with Pablo and me.”
Jesus Maria grasped this logic and raced toward

Danny’s house. The house was dark

“Danny,” Jesus

Maria cried. “Danny, your house is on fire!” There was

no answer “Danny!” he cried again.

A window went up in Mrs. Morales’ house next door.
Danny sounded irritable. “What the hell do you want?’"
“Your other house is on fire, the one Pablo and Pilon
live in.”

^ 78 ^
1

For a moment Danny did not answer. Then he de-''
manded, “Is the fire department there?”
“Yes,” cried Jesus Maria.

The whole sky was lighted up by now. The crackling
of burning timbers could be heard. “Well,” said Danny,
“if the fire department can’t do anything about it, what

does Pilon expect me to do?”
Jesus Maria heard the

window bang shut, and he

turned and trotted back toward the fire. It was a bad
time to call Danny, he knew, but then how could one
tell? If

Danny had missed the fire, he might have been

angry. Jesus Maria was glad he had told him about it

anyway. Now the responsibility lay on Mrs. Morales.
It

was a little house, there was plenty of draft, the

walls were perfealy dry. Perhaps not since old China-

town had burned had there been such a quick and
thorough fire. The men of the fire department took a
look at the blazing walls and then began wetting the

brush and the trees and the neighboring houses. In less
than an hour the house was completely gone. Only
then did the hoses play on the heap of ashes to put out
the coals and the sparks.
Pilon and Pablo and Jesus Maria stood shoulder to

^ 79 ^

shoulder and watched the whole thing. Half the population of Monterey and all the population of Tortilla

Flat except

Danny and Mrs. Morales stood happily

about and watched the fire. At last, when it was all over,

when only a cloud of steam arose from the black heap,
Pilon turned silently away.

"Where goest thou?” Pablo called.
“I go,” said Pilon, “to the woods to have out

my

you to come too.

if

sleep. I counsel

It will

be well

Danny does not see us for a little while.” Tliey nodded
gravely and followed him into tlie pine forest. “It is a
lesson to us," said Pilon.

“By this we Icam never to

leave wine in a house overnight.”

“Next time,” Pablo said hopelessly, “you will take
it outside

and some one will .steal it.”

^ 8o ^

VI
How three sinful men, through contrition, attained
peace. How Danny's Friends swore comradeship.

W

iiEN the sun was clear of

the pines, and tlie ground was warm, and the niglifs

dew was drying on the geranium leaves, Danny came
out on his porch to sit in the sunshine and to muse

warmly of certain happenings. He slipped off his shoes

and wriggled his toes on the sun-warmed boards of the
porch.

He had walked down earlier in the morning

and viewed the square black ashes and twisted plumbing which had been his other house. He had indulged
in a

little

conventional anger against careless friends,

had mourned for a moment over that transitory quality
of earthly property which

made spiritual property so

much more valuable. He had thought over the ruin of
his status as a man with a house to rent; and, all this

^ 8i

clutter of necessary

and decent emotion having been

satisfied and swept away, he had finally slipped into his

true emotion, one of relief that at least one of his bur-

dens was removed.
"If

it

were still there, I would be covetous of the

“My friends have been cool toward
me because they owed me money. Now we can be free

rent,” he thought.

and happy again.”
But Danny knew he must discipline his friends a
little,

or they would consider him soft. Therefore, as

he sat on his porch, warding oflE flies with a moving hand

which conveyed more warning than threat to the flies,

he went over the things he must say to his friends before
he allowed them back into the corral of his affection.

He must show them tliat he was not a man to be imposed upon. But he yearned to get it over and to be

once more that Danny whom every one loved, that

Danny whom people sought out when they had a gallon
of wine or a piece of meat. As the owner of two houses

he had been considered rich, and he had missed a great

many tidbits.
Pilon and Pablo and Jesus Maria Corcoran slept a

long time on the pine needles in the forest. It had been

^ 82 ^

a night of terrible excitement, and they were tired. But
at length the sun shone into their faces with noonday

ardor and the ants walked on them, and two blue jays
stood on the ground nearby, calling them all manner
of sharp names.

What finished their sleep, though, was a picnic party
which settled just on the other side of the bush from

them and opened a big lunch basket from which moving
smells drifted to Pilon and Pablo and Jesus Maria. They

awakened; they sat up; and then the enormity of their
situation burst upon them.

"How did the fire start?” asked Pablo plaintively,
and no one knew.
"Perhaps,” said Jesus Maria, “we had better go to

another town for a while—to Watsonville or to Salinas;
those are nice towns.”

Pilon pulled the brassiere from his pocket and ran
his fingers over its pink smoothness. And he held it to

the sunlight and looked through it.

“That would only delay matters,” he decided. “I
think it would be better to go to Danny and confess

our fault, like little children to a father. Then he can’t

^ 83 ^

say anything without being sorry. And besides, have we

not this present for Mrs. Morales?”

His friends nodded agreement. Pilon’s eyes strayed
through the thick brush to die picnic party, and particularly to that

huge lunch basket from ivhich came

the penetrating odors of deviled eggs. Pilon’s nose wrin-

kled a little, like a rabbit’s. He smiled in a quiet reverie,
“I am going to walk, my friends. In a little while I will

meet you at the quarry. Do not bring the basket if you
can help it.”

They watched sadly as Pilon got up and walked
away, through the trees, in a direction at right angles
to the picnic

and the basket. Pablo and Jesus Maria

were not surprised a few moments later, to hear a dog
bark, a rooster crow, high shrill laughter, the snarl of

a wild cat, a little short scream and a cry for help;
but the picnic party was surprised and fascinated. The

two men and two women left their basket and trotted
away toward these versatile sounds.
Pablo and Jesus Maria obeyed Pilon. Tb.*y did not
take the basket, but always afterwards

tl*sir

hats

and

their shirts were stained with deviled eggs.

At about three o’clock in the afternoon the three

^ 84 ^

TTrrFiTTTTrnniTTTT

penitents walked slowly toward Danny’s house. Their

arms were loaded with

o£ reconciliation:

offerings

oranges and apples and bananas, bottles of olives and
pickles, sandwiches of pressed

ham, egg sandwiches,

bottles of soda pop, a paper carton of potato salad and

a copy of the Saturday Evening Post.

Danny saw them coming, and he stood up and tried
to remember the things he had to say. They lined up

in front of him and hung their heads.

"Dogs of dogs,” Danny called them, and “thieves of
decent folks’ other house,” and “spawn of cuttlefish.”

He named their modiers cows and their fathers ancient
sheep.

Pilon opened the bag he held and exposed the ham
sandwiches. And Danny said he had no more trust in
friends, that his faith

had been

frostbitten

and

his

friendship trampled upon. And then he began to have

a little trouble remembering, for Pablo had taken two
deviled eggs out of his bosom. But Danny went back
to the grand generation and criticized the virtue of its

women and the potency of its men.
Pilon pulled the pink brassiere from his pocket and
let it dangle listlessly

from his fingers.

^ 86 ^

Danny forgot everything, then. He sat down on the
porch and his friends sat down, and the packages came
open. They ate to a point of discomfort. It was an hour
later,

when they reclined at ease on the porch, giving

attention to little besides digestion, when Danny asked
casually, as

about some far-off object,

“How did the

fire start?”

“We don’t know,” Pilon explained. "We went to
sleep,

and then it started. Perhaps we have enemies.”

“Perhaps,” said Pablo devoutly, “perhaps God had a
finger in it.”

“Who can say what makes the good God act the way

He does?” added Jesus Maria.
When Pilon handed over the brassiere and explained
how it svas a present for Mrs. Morales, Danny was reticent.

He eyed tlie brassiere with some skepticism. His

friends, he felt, were flattering Mrs. Morales.

“That is

not a woman to give presents to,” he said finally. “Too
often we are tied to women by the silk stockings we
give them.”

He could not explain to his friends the

coolness that had

come to his relationship with Mrs.

Morales since he was the owner of only one house; nor
could he, in courtesy to Mrs. Morales, describe his own

pleasure at that coolness. “I will put this

little

thing

away," he said. "Some day it may be o£ use to some
one.”

When the evening came, and it was dark, they went
into the house and built a fire of cones in the air-tight
stove.

Danny, in proof of his forgiveness, brought out

a quart of grappa and shared its fire with his friends.

They

settled easily into

the

bad Mrs. Morales’ chickens are

new
all

life.

“It is too

dead,” Pilon ob-

served.

But even here was no bar to happiness. “She is going
to buy two dozen new ones on Monday,” said Danny.

Pilon smiled contentedly. “Those hens of Mrs. Soto’s

were no good,” he said. “I told Mrs. Soto they needed
oyster shells, but she paid no attention to me.”

They drank the quart of grappa, and there was just
enough to promote the sweetness of comradeship.
"It is good to have friends," said Danny. “How lonely
it is in the world if there are

no friends to sit with one

and to share one’s grappa.”

“Or one’s sandwiches,” Pilon added quickly.
Pablo was not quite over his remone, for he suspected
the true state of celestial politics which had caused the

^ 88

burning of the house. “In all the world there are few
friends like thee,

Danny. It is not given to many to

have such solace.”
Before Danny sank completely under the waves of his
friends, he sounded one warning. “I want all of you to

keep out of my bed,” he ordered. “That is one thing I

must have to myself.”
Although no one had mentioned it, each of the four

knew they were all going to live in Danny’s house.
Pilon sighed with pleasure. Gone was the worry of the
rent; gone the responsibility of owing money.

^ 89 ^

No longer

was he a tenant, but a guest, in his mind he gave thanks
for the burning of the other house.

“We will all be happy here, Danny,” he said. “In the
evenings we will sit by the

fire

and our friends will

come in to visit. And sometimes maybe we will have a
glass of wine to drink for friendship’s sake.”

Then Jesus Maria, in a frenzy of gratefulness, made
a rash promise. It was the grappa that did it, and the
night of the fire, and all the deviled eggs. He felt that

he had received great gifts, and he wanted to distribute
a gift. “It shall be our burden and our duty to see that

there

is

always food in the house for Danny,” he de-

claimed. “Never shall our friend go hungry.”

Pilon and Pablo looked up in alarm, but the thing

was said; a beautiful and generous thing. No man could
with impunity destroy it. Even Jesus Maria understood,
after it was said, the magnitude of his statement. They

could only hope that Danny would forget it.
“For,” Pilon mused to himself, “if this promise were
enforced,

it

would be worse than rent.

It

would be

««lavery.”

“We swear it, Dannyl” he said.
'They sat about the stove witli tears in their eyes, and

their

love

for

one another was almost unbearable.

Pablo wiped his wet eyes with the back of his hand,

and he echoed Pilon’s remark. “We shall be very happy
living here,” he said.

^9

*

VII
How Dminy’s Friends became a force for Good.
How they succored the poor Pirate.

A

GREAT many people saw the

Pirate every day, and some laughed at him, and some
pitied him; but

no one knew him very well, and no

one interfered with him. He was a huge, broad man,
with a tremendous black and bushy beard.

He wore

jeans and a blue shirt, and he had no hat. In town he

wore shoes. There was a shrinking in the Pirate’s eyes

when he confronted any grown person, the secret look
of an animal that would like to run away if it dared

turn its back long enough. Because of this expression,
the paisanos of Monterey knew that his head had not

grown up with the rest of his body. They called him

The Pirate because of his beard. Fvery day people saw
him wheeling his barrow of pitchwood about the streets

^ 93

until he sold the load.

And always in a cluster at his

heels walked his five dogs.

Enrique was rather houndish in appearance, although
his tail was bushy. Pajarito was brown and curly, and

these were the only two things you could see about him.

Rudolph was a dog o£ whom passers-by said, “He is an
American dog.” Fluff was a Pug and Senor Alec Thompson seemed to be a kind of an Airedale. They walked
in a squad behind the Pirate, very respectful toward

him, and very solicitous for his happiness. When he sat

down to rest from wheeling his barrow, they all tried
to sit in his lap and have their ears scratched.

Some people had seen the Pirate early in the morning on Alvarado Street; some had seen

him cutting

pitchwood; some knew he sold kindling; but no one
except Pilon

knew everything the Pirate did. Pilon

knew everybody and everything about everybody.

The Pirate lived in a deserted chicken house in the
yard of a deserted house on Tortilla Flat.

He would

have thought it presumptuous to live in the house itself./The dogs lived around and on top of him, and the

Pirate liked this, for his dogs kept him warm on the
coldest nights. If his feet were cold, he had only to put

them against the warm belly of Senor Alec Thompson.

The chicken house was so low that the Pirate had to
crawl in on his hands and knees.

Early every morning, well before daylight, the Pirate

crawled out of his chicken house, and the dogs followed

him, roughing their coats and sneezing in the cold air.

Then the party went down to Monterey and worked
along an alley. Four or five restaurants had their back
doors on this alley. The Pirate entered each one, into a
restaurant kitchen, warm and smelling of food.

Grum-

bling cooks put packages of scraps in his hands at each
place. They didn’t know why they did it.

When the Pirate had visited each back door and
had his arms full of parcels, he walked back up the hill
to Munroe Street and entered a vacant lot, and the dogs

excitedly

swarmed about him. Then he opened the

parcels and fed the dogs. For himself he took bread or

a piece of meat out of each package, but he did not
pick the best for himself.

The dogs sat down about

him, licking their lips nervously, and shifting their feet
while they waited for food. They never fought over it,

and that was a surprising thing. The Pirate’s dogs never
fought each other, but they fought everything else that

^ 95 ff

wandered the streets of Monterey on four legs. It was
a fine thing to see the pack of five, hunting fox-terriers

and Pomeranians like rabbits.
Daylight had come by the time the meal was over.

The Pirate sat on the ground and watched the sky turn
blue with the morning. Below him he saw the schooners

put out to sea with deckloads of lumber. He heard the
bell buoy ringing sweetly off China Point. The dogs sat

about him and gnawed at the bones. The Pirate seemed
to be listening to the day rather than seeing it, for while
his eyes did not move about, there was an air of attentiveness in him. His big hands strayed to the dogs and
his fingers worked soothingly in tlie coarse hair. After

about half an hour, the Pirate went to the comer of
the vacant

lot,

threw the covering of sacks from his

wheelbarrotv and

dug up his ax out of the ground

where he buried it every evening. Then up the hill he
pushed the barrow, and into the woods, until he found
a dead tree, full of pitch. By noon he had a load of
fine kindling;

and then, still followed by his dogs, he

walked the streets until he had sold the load for twentyfive cents.

It was possible to observe all this,

^ 96 ^

but what he did

with the quarter, no one could tell. He never spent it
In the night, guarded from danger by his dogs, he went
into the woods and hid the day’s quarter with hundreds

o£ others. Somewhere he had a great hoard o£ money.
Pilon, that acute man, from whom no details of the
life of his fellows escaped, and

to

who was doubly delighted

come upon those secrets that nestled deep in the

brains of his acquaintances, discovered the Pirate’s hoard

by a logical process. Pilon reasoned thus: “Every day
that Pirate has a quarter. If it is two dimes and a nickel,

he takes it to a store and gets a twenty-five cent piece.

He never spends any money at all. Therefore, he must
be hiding it.”
Pilon tried to compute the amount of the treasure.

For years the Pirate had been living in this way. Six
days a week he cut pitchwood, and on Sundays he went
to church. His clothes he got from the back doors of
houses, his food at the back doors of restaurants. Pilon

puzzled with the great numbers for a while, and then

gave it up. “The Pirate must have at least a hundred
dollars,” he thought.

For a long time Pilon had considered these things.

But it was only after the foolish and enthusiastic promise

^ 97

to feed Danny that the thought of the Pirate’s hoard

gained any personal significance to Pilon.
Before he approached the subject at all, Pilon put
his mind through a long and stunning preparation.
felt very sorry for

He

the Pirate. “Poor little half-formed

one,” he said to himself. “God did not give him all the

brain he should have. That poor little Pirate cannot

look after himself. For see, he lives in filth in an old

He feeds upon scraps fit only for his
dogs. His clothes are thin and ragged. And because his

chicken house.

brain is not a good one, he hides his money.”

Now, with his groundwork of pity laid, Pilon moved
on to his solution. "Would it not be a thing of merit,”
he thought, “to do those things for him which he cannot
do for himself? To buy him warm clothes, to feed h im
food fit for a human? But,” he reminded himself, “I

have no money to do these things, although they lie

squirming in my heart. How can these charitable things

be accomplished?”

Now he was getting somewhere. Like the cat, which
during a long hour closes in on a sparrow, Pilon was
ready for his pounce. "I have it!” his brain cried. “It
is like this:

The Pirate has money, but he has not the

^ 98

brain to use it. I have the brain! I will offer my brain
to his use. I will give freely of my mind. That shall be

my charity toward this poor little half-made man.”
It

was one of the

built.

finest structures

Pilon had ever

The urge of the artist to show his work to an

audience came upon him. “I tvill tell it to Pablo,” he
thought. But he wondered whether he would dare do

such a thing. Was Pablo strictly honest? Would he not

want to divert some of this money to his own ends?
Pilon decided not to take the chance, right then, anyway.
It is astounding to find that the belly of every black

and evil thing is as white as snow. And it is saddening
to discover
leprous.

how

the concealed parts of angels are

Honor and peace to Pilon, for he had dis-

covered how to uncover and to disclose to the world
the good that lay in every evil thing. Nor was he blind,
as so many saints are, to the evil of good things. It must

be admitted with sadness that Pilon had neither the
stupidity, the self-righteousness

nor the greediness foi

reward ever to become a saint. Enough for Pilon to do

good and to be rewarded by the glow of human brother-

hood accomplished.

^ 99

Ttiat very night he paid a visit to the chicken house

where the Pirate lived with his dogs. Danny, Pablo and
Jesus Maria, sitting by the stove, saw him go and said

nothing. For, they thought delicately, either a vapor
o£ love had been wafted to Pilon or else he knew where

he could get a little wine. In either case it was none
of their business until he told them about it.
It was well after dark, but

Pilon had a candle in his

pocket, for it might be a good thing to watch the ex-

pression on the Pirate’s face while he talked. And Pilon

had a big round sugar cookie in a bag, that Susie Francisco,

who worked in a bakery, had given him in return

for a formula for getting the love of Charlie Guzman.

Charlie was a Postal Telegraph messenger and rode a
motorcycle; and Susie had a man’s cap to put on back-

ward in case Charlie should ever ask her to ride with
him. Pilon thought the Pirate might like the sugar
cookie.

The night was very dark. Pilon picked his way along
a narrow street bordered with vacant

lots

and with

weed-grown, neglected gardens.
Galvez’

bad bulldog came snarling out of Galvez’

yard, and Pilon spoke soothing compliments to him.

^ too

“Nice dog/‘ he said gently, and “Pretty dog,” both of

them palpable lies. They impressed the bulldog, however, for he retired into Galvez’ yard.

Pilon came at last to the vacant property where the
Pirate lived.

And now he knew he must be careful,

for the Pirate’s dogs,

if

they suspected ill of any one

toward their master, were known to become defending
furies.

As Pilon stepped into the yard, he heard deep

and threatening growls from the chicken house.
“Pirate,” he called. “It is thy good friend Pilon, come

to talk with thee.”

There was silence. The dogs stopped growling.
“Pirate, it is only Pilon.”

A deep surly voice answered him, “Go away. I am
sleeping now. The dogs are sleeping. It is dark, Pilon.

Go to bed.”
“I have a candle in my pocket,” Pilon called. “It will

make a light as bright as day in thy dark house. I have a
big sugar cookie for thee, too.”

A faint scuffling sounded in the chicken house. “Come
then,” the Pirate said. “1 will

tell

the dogs

it is all

right.”

As he advanced through the weeds, Pilon could hear

^ lOl ^

the Pirate talking softly to his dogs, explaining to them
that it was only Pilon, who would do no harm. Pilon

bent over in front of the dark doorway and scratched a

match and lighted his candle.

The Pirate was seated on the dirt floor, and his dogs
were all about him. Enrique growled, and had to be
reassured again. “That one is not so wise as the others,”

the Pirate said pleasantly. His eyes were the pleased eyes

of an amused child. When he smiled his big white teeth
glistened in the candlelight.

Pilon held out the bag. “It is a fine cake for you,”

he said.

The Pirate took the bag and looked into it; then he
smiled delightedly, and brought out the cookie.

The

dogs all grinned and faced him, and moved their feet

and licked their lips. The Pirate broke his cookie into
seven pieces. The first he gave to Pilon,

who was his

guest. “Now, Enrique,” he said. “Now Fluff.

Now Senor

Alec iThompson." Each dog received his piece and

gulped it and looked for more.’ Last, the Pirate ate his

and held up his hands to the dogs. “No more, you see,”
he told them. Immediately the dogs lay down about
him.

^ loa

Pilon sat on, the floor and stood the candle on the

ground in front of him. The Pirate questioned him
self-consciously with his eyes. Pilon sat silently, to let

many questions pass through

the Pirate's head. At

length he said, “Thou art a worry to thy friends.”

The Pirate’s eyes filled with astonishment. “I? To
my friends? What friends?”
Pilon softened his voice.

"Thou hast many Mends

who think of thee. They do not come to see thee because thou art proud. They think it might hurt thy
pride to have them see thee living in this chicken house^
clothed in rags, eating garbage with thy dogs. But th«c
friends of thine worry for fear the bad life may make

thee ill.”

The Pirate was following his words with breathless
astonishment, and his brain tried to realize these new
things he was hearing. It did not occur to him to doubt
them, since Pilon was saying them. “I have all these

Mends?” he said in wonder. “And I did not kifow it.

And I am a worry to those Mends. I did not know,
Pilon. I would not have worried them if I had known.”

He swallowed to clear his throat of emotion. “You see,
Pilon, the dogs like it here. And I like it because of

^ 103

'{§

them. 1 did not think I was a worry to my friends/'

Tears came into the Pirate’s eyes.
“Nevertheless,” Pilon said, “thy mode of living keeps
all thy friends uneasy.”

The Pirate looked down at the ground and tried to
think clearly, but as always, when he attempted to cope

with a problem, his brain grew gray and no help came

from it, but only a feeling of helplessness. He looked to
his dogs for protection, but they had gone back to sleep,

for it was none of their business. And then he looked
earnestly into Pilon’s eyes.

“You must tell me what to

do, Pilon. I did not know these things.”
It

was too easy. Pilon was a little ashamed that it

should be so easy. He hesitated; nearly gave it up; but

then he knew he would be angry with himself if he
did. “Thy friends are poor,” he said. “They would like

to help thee, but they have

no money. If thou hast

money hidden, bring it out into the open. Buy thyself
some clothes. Eat food that is not cast out by other
people. Bring thy money out of its hiding place. Pirate.”

Pilon had been looking closely at the Pirate’s face

while he spoke. He saw the eyes droop with suspicion

and then with sullenness. In a moment Pilon knew two

^ 104 ^

things certainly;

first,

that the Pirate

den; and second, that
to get at it.

it

had money hid-

was not going to be easy

He was pleased at the latter fact. The Pirate

had become a problem in tactics such as Pilon enjoyed.

Now the Pirate was looking at him again, and in his
eyes was cunning,

and on top of that, a studied in-

genuousness. “I have no money anywhere,” he said.

“But every day, my friend, I have seen thee get a
quarter for thy wood, and never have I seen thee spend
it.”

This time the Pirate’s brain came to his rescue. “I
give it to a poor old woman,” he said. “I have no

money

anywhere ” And with his tone he closed a door tightly

on the subject.
“So it must be guile,” Pilon thought. So those gifts,
that in
play.

him were so sharpened, must be called into

He stood up and lifted his candle. “I only thought

to tell thee how thy friends worry,”

he said critically.

“If thou wilt not try to help, I can do nothing

for thee.”

The sweetness came back into the Pirate’s eyes. “Tell
them I am healthy,” he begged. "Tell my friends

cotm and see me. I will not be too proud, I will be

^ 106 £5

to

glad

to see

them any time. Wilt thou tell them for me,

Pilon?”
“I will tell them,” Pilon said ungraciously.

friends will not

“But thy

be pleased when they see thou dost

nothing to relieve their minds.” Pilon blew out his
candle and went away into the darkness. He knew that
the Pirate would never tell where his hoard was. It must

be found by stealth, taken by force and then all the

good things given to the Pirate. It was the only way.

And so Pilon set himself to watch tlie Pirate. He followed him into the forest when he went to cut kindlings.

He lay in wait outside the chicken house at night. He
talked to him long and earnestly, and nothing came of
it.

The treasure was as far from discovery as ever. Either

it lay buried in the chicken house or it was hidden deep

in the forest, and was only visited at night.

The long and fruitless vigils wore out the patience
of Pilon. He knew he must have help and advice. And
who could better give it than those comrades, Danny,
Pablo and Jesus Maria? Who could be so stealthy, so
guileful?

Who could melt to kindness with more ease?

Pilon took them into his confidence; but first he pre-

pared them, as he had prepared himself’

^ 107 ^

Th^ Pirate’s

poverty, his helplessness, and finally— the solution.

When

he came to the solution, his friends were in a philanthropic frenzy. They applauded him. Their faces shone

with kindness. Pablo thought there might be well over
a hundred dollars in the hoard.

When their joy had settled to a working enthusiasm,
they came to plans.

“We must watch him,” Pablo said.
“But I have watched him,” Pilon argued. “It must
be that he creeps off in the night, and then one cannot
follow too close, for his dogs guard him like devils. It
is

not going to be so easy.”

“You’ve used every argument?” Danny asked.
“Yes. Every one.”

In the end it was Jesus Maria, that humane man,

who found the way out. “It is difficult while he lives in
he said. “But suppose he lived

that chicken house,”

here, with us? Either his silence

would break under

our kindness, or else it would be easier to know when
he goes out at night.”

The friends gave a good deal of thought to this suggestion. “Sometimes the things he gets out of restaurants

^ 108

are nearly new,” mused Pablo. “I have seen him with

a steak out of which only a little was missing.”
“It might be as much as two hundred dollars,” said

Pilon.

Danny offered an

objection.

“But those dogs—he

would bring his dogs with him.”

“They are good dogs,” said Pilon. “They obey him
exactly. You may draw a line around a comer and say,

‘Keep thy dogs within this line.’ He will tell them, and
those dogs will stay.”
“I saw the Pirate one morning,
half a cake, just a little bit

and he had nearly

damp with coffee,” said

Pablo.

Tlie question settled itself. The house resolved itself
into a committee, and the committee visited the Pirate.
It was a crowded place, that chicken house, when they
all got inside.

The Pirate tried to disguise his happiness

with a gruff tone.

“The weather has been bad,” he said socially. And,
“You wouldn’t believe, maybe, that I found a tick as
big as a pigeon’s eg^ on Rudolph’s neck.” And he spoke
disparagingly of his home, as a host should. “It is too
small,” he said. “It is not a fit place for one’s friends

to come.

But it is warm and snug, especially for the

dogs.”

Then Pilon spoke. He told the Pirate that worry was
killing his friends; but if he would go to live with them,

then they could sleep again, with their minds at ease.
It was a very great shock to

the Pirate. He looked at

his hands. And he looked to his dogs for comfort,

but

they would not meet his glance. At last he wiped the

happiness from his eyes with the back of his hand, and

he wiped his hand on his big black beard.

“And the dogs?” he asked softly. “You want the
dogs, too? Are you friends of the dogs?”

Pilon nodded. “Yes, the dogs, too. There will be a

whole corner set aside for tire dogs.”
Tire Pirate had a great deal of pride. He was afraid

he might not conduct himself well “Go away now,” he
said pleadingly.

“Go home now. To-morrow

I

will

come.”

His friends knew how he felt. They crawled out of
the door and left him alone.

“He will be happy with us, that one,” said Jesus
Maria.

“Poor little lonely man,” Danny added. “If

^ no ^

I

had

known, I would have asked him long ago, even if he had

no treasure.”

A flame of joy burned in all of them.
They settled soon into the new relationship. Danny,
with a piece of blue chalk, drew a segment of a circle,
enclosing a

comer of the living room, and that was

where the dogs must stay when they were in the house.

The Pirate slept in that comer too, with the dogs.
The house was beginning to be a little crowded, with
five men and five dogs; but from the first, Danny and
his friends realized that their invitation to the Pirate

had been inspired by that weary and anxious angel who
guarded their destinies and protected them from evil.
Every morning, long before his friends were awake,
the Pirate arose from his comer and, followed by his
dogs, he

made the rounds of the restaurants and the

wharves. He was one of those for whom every one feels

a kindliness. His packages grew larger.

The paisanos

received his bounty and made use of it;

fresh fish, half

pies, untouched loaves of stale bread, meat that required

only a little soda to take the green out

They began

really to live.

And their acceptance of his gifts touched the Pirate

more deeply than anything they could have done for
him There was a light of worship in his eyes as he
watched them eat the food he brought.
In the evening, when they sat about the stove and
discussed the doings of Tortilla Flat with

the lazy

voices of fed gods, the Pirate’s eyes darted from mouth

to mouth, and his own lips moved, whispering again the

words his friends said. The dogs pressed in about him
jealously.

These were his friends, he told himself in the night,

when the house was dark, when the dogs snuggled close
to him so that all might be warm. These men loved him

so much that it womed them to have him live alone.

The Pirate had often to repeat this to himself, for it
was an astounding thing, an unbelievable tiling. His
wheelbarrow stood in Danny's yard now, and every day

he cut his pitchwood and sold it. But so afraid was tlie
Pirate that he might miss some word his friends said in

the evening, might not be there to absorb some stream
of the warm companionship, that he had not visited his

hoard for several days to put the new coins there.
His friends were kind to him. They treated him with
a sweet courtesy; but always there was some eye open

^ 118 ^

and upon him. When he wheeled his barrow into the
woods, one of the friends walked with him, and sat on
a log while he worked. When he went into the gulch,
the last thing at night, Danny or Pablo or Pilon or Jesus

Maria kept him company. And in the night he must
have been very quiet to have crept out without a shadow

behind him.
For a week, the friends merely watched the Pirate.

But at last the inactivity tired them. Direct action was
out of the question, they knew. And so one evening the
subject of the desirability of hiding one’s money came

up for discussion.
Pilon began it. “I had an uncle, a regular miser, and

he hid his gold in the woods. And one time he went to
look at it, and it was gone. Some one had found it and
stolen it. He was an old man, then, and all his money

was gone, and he hanged himself.” Pilon noticed with

some satisfaction, the look of apprehension that came

upon the Pirate’s face.

Danny noticed it, too; and he continued, “The viejo,
my grandfather, who owned this house, also buried
money. I do not know how much, but he was reputed a
rich man, so there must have been three or four hun-

^ 113

dred dollars. The viejo dug a deep hole and put his

money in it, and then he covered it up, and then he
strewed pine needles over the ground until he thought

no one could see that anything had been done there.
But when he went back, the hole was open, and the

money was gone.”

The Pirate’s lips followed the words. A look of terror
had come into his face His fingers picked among the
neck hairs of Seilor Alec Thompson

The friends ex-

changed a glance and dropped the subject for the timebeing. They turned to the love life of Cornelia Ruiz.

In the night the Pirate crept out of the house, and
the dogs crept after him; and Pilon crept after all of

them. The Pirate went swiftly into the forest, leaping
with sure feet over logs and brush. Pilon floundered

behind him. But when they had gone at least two miles,
Pilon was winded, and tom by vines. He paused to rest

a moment; and then he realized that all sounds ahead
of him had ceased.

He waited and listened and crept

about, but the Pirate had disappeared.

After two hours, Pilon went back again, slowly and
tiredly.

There was the Pirate in the house, fast asleep

among his dogs. The dogs lifted their heads when Pilon

^ 114 £5

and Pilon thought they smiled satirically at

entered,

him for a moment.

A conference took place in the gulch the next
morning.
“It

is

not possible to follow him,” Pilon reported,

“He vanished. He sees in the dark. He knows every tree
in the forest.

We must find some other way.”

“Perhaps one is not enough,” Pablo suggested. “I£
all of

us should follow him, then one might not lose

track of him.”

“We will talk again to-night,” said Jesus Maria, "only
worse. A lady I know is going to give me a little wine,”
he added modestly. “Maybe if the Pirate has a little

wine in him, he will not disappear so easily.” So it was
left.

Jesus Maria’s lady gave him a whole gallon of wine.

What could compare with the Pirate’s delight that evening when a fruit jar of wine was put into his hand,
when he sat with his friends and sipped his wine and
listened to the talk? Such joy had come rarely into the
Pirate’s life.

He wished he might clasp these dear people

to his breast and tell them how much he loved them.

But that was not a thing he could do, for they might

^ 115

fhink he was drunk. He wished he could do some tre-

mendous thing to show them his love.

“We spoke last night of burying money,” said Pilon.
"To-day I remembered a cousin of mine, a clever man.
If

any one in the world could hide money where it

would never be found, he could do it. So he took his

money and hid it. Perhaps you have seen him, that poor
little

one rvho crawls about the wharf and begs

heads to make soup of. That is my cousin.

fish

Some one

stole his buried money.”

The worry came back into the Pirate’s face.
Story topped story, and in eacli one all manner of evil

dogged the footsteps of those who hid their money.
"It is better to keep one’s money close, to spend some

now and then, to give a little to one’s friends,” Danny
finished.

They had been watching the Pirate narrowly, and in
the middle of the worst story they had seen the worry

go from his face, and a smile of relief take its place.

Now he sipped his wine and his eyes glittered with joy.
The friends were in despair. All their plans had foiled.
They were sick at heart. After all their goodness and
their diarity, this had happened. The Pirate had in some

^ 116

way escapea the good they had intended to confer upon
him. They finished their wine and went moodily to bed.

Few things could happen in the night without Pilon’s
knowledge. His ears remained open while the rest of

him slept. He heard the stealthy exit of the Pirate and
his dogs

from the house.

He leaped to awaken his

friends; and in a moment the four were following the

Pirate in the direction of the forest. It was very dark

when they entered the pine forest. The four friends ran
into trees, tripped on berry vines;

but for a long time

they could hear the Pirate marching on ahead of them.

They followed as far as Pilon had followed the night
before, and then, suddenly, silence, and tlte whispeiing
forest

and the vague night wind. They combed the

woods and the brush patches, but the Pirate had disappeared again.

At last, cold and disconsolate, they came together and
trudged wearily back, toward Monterey. The dawn came
before they got back. The sun was already shining on
the bay. The smoke of the morning fires arose to them

out of Monterey.

The Pirate walked out oi

the porch to greet them,

and his face was happy. They passed him sullenly, and

^ 117 ^

filed into the living room. There on the table lay a large

canvas bag.

The Pirate followed them in. “I lied to thee, Pilon,”
he said. “I told thee I had no money, for I was afraid.
I did not know about my friends, then. You have told

how hidden money is so often stolen, and I am afraid
again.

Only last night did a way out come to me. My

money will be safe with my friends. No one can steal it
if

my friends guard it for me.”
The four men stared at him in horror. “Take thy

money back to the woods and hide it,” Danny said
savagely. “We do not want to watch it.”

“No,” said the Pirate. “I would not feel safe to hide
iL But I will be happy knowing my friends guard it
for me. You would not believe it, but the last two nights

some one followed me into the forest

to steal

my

money."
Terrible as the blow was, Pilon, that clever
tried to escape it. “Before this

man,

money is put into our

hands, maybe you would like to take some out,” he suggested smoothly.

The Pirate shook his head. “No. I cannot do that. It
is promised. I have nearly a thousand two-bitses.

^ 118

When

I have a thousand I will buy a gold candle-stick for San

Francisco de Assisi

“Once I had a nice dog, and that dog was sick; and
I promised a gold candle-stick of one tliousand days if

that

dog would get well. And,” he spread his great

hands, "that dog got well.”
"Is it one of these dogs?” Pilon demanded.

“No,” said the Pirate. “A truck ran over him a little
later.”

So it was over, all hope of diverting the money. Danny

and Pablo morosely lifted the heavy bag of silver quarters,

took it in the other room and put it under the

pillow of Danny’s bed. In time they would take a certain pleasure in the

knowledge that

this

money lay

under the pillow, but now their defeat was bitter. There
I

was nothing in the world they could do about it. Their
chance had come, and it had gone.

The Pirate stood before them, and there were tears
of happiness in his eyes, for he had proved his love for
his friends.

“To think,” he said, “all those years I lay in that
chicken house, and I did not know any pleasure. But
now.” he added, “oh, now I am very happy.”

VIII

How Danny's Friends sought mystic treasure on St.
Andrew's Eve. How Pilon found it and later how
a pair of serge pants changed ownership twice

I F HE had been a hero, the
Portagee would have spent a miserable time in the

army. Tlie fact that he was Big Joe Portagee, with a
decent training in the Monterey jail, not only saved him
the misery of patriotism thwarted, but solidified his conviction that as a man’s days are rightly devoted half to

sleeping and half to waking, so a man’s years are rightly

spent half in jail and half out. Of the duration of the
war, Joe Portagee spent considerably more time in jail

than out.

In civilian life, one is punished for things one does;

but army codes add a new principle to this—they punish
a

man for things he does not do. Joe Portagee never did

^

121

figure this out. He didn’t dean his rifle; he didn’t shave;

and once or twice, on

leave,

he didn’t come back.

Coupled with these shortcomings was a propensity Big
Joe had for genial argument when he was taken to task.
Ordinarily, he spent half his time in jail; of two years

In *&e army, he spent eighteen months in jail. And he

was far from satisfied with prison life in the army. In
the Monterey jail he was accustomed to ease and com-

panionship. In the army, he found only work. In Monterey,

only one charge was ever brought against him:

Drunk and Disorderly Conduct. The

charges in the

army bewildered him so completely that the effect on
his mind was probably permanent.

Wlien the war was over, and all the troops were disbanded, Big Joe still had six months’ sentence to serve.
'The charge had been: “Being drunk on duty. Striking a
sergeant with a kerosene can. Denying his identity (he

couldn’t remember it, so he denied everything). Steal-

ing two gallons of cooked beans, and going A.W.O.L.

on the Major’s horse.”
If the

Armistice had not already been signed. Big

Joe would probably have been shot. He came home to

Monterey long after the other veterans had arrived and

had eaten up all the sweets of victory.

When Big Joe swung down from the train, he was
dressed in an army overcoat and tunic and a pair of

blue serge trousers.

The town hadn’t changed much, except for prohibition;

and prohibition hadn’t changed Torrelli’s. Joe

traded his overcoat for a gallon of wine and went out to
find his friends.

True

friends

he found none that

night,

but in

Monterey he found no lack of those vile and false harpies and pimps who are ever ready to lead men into the
pit. Joe,

who was not very moral, had no revulsion for

the pit; he liked it.

Before very

many hours had passed, his wine was

gone, and he had no money; and then the harpies tried
to get Joe out of the pit, and he wouldn’t go. He was

comfortable there.

When they tried to eject him by force. Big Joe, with
a just and terrible resentment, broke all the furniture

and all the windows, sent half-clothed girls screaming
into the night;

and then, as an afterthought, set ftre

to the house. It was not a safe thing to lead Joe into

temptation; he had no resistance to it at all.

A policeman finally interfered and took him in hand
The Portagee sighed happily. He was home again.
After a short and juryless trial, in which he was sen-

tenced to thirty days, Joe lay luxuriously on his leather
cot and slept heavily for one tenth of his sentence.

The Portagee liked the Monterey jail. It was a place
to meet people. If he stayed there long enough, all his

friends were in and out. The time passed quickly.

He

was a little sad when he had to go, but his sadness was

tempered with the knowledge -that it was very easy to
get back again.

He would have liked to go into the pit again, but he
had no money and no wine. He combed the streets for
his old friends, Pilon and Danny and Pablo, and could

not find them.

The police sergeant said he hadn’t

booked them for a long time.

“They must be dead,’’ said the Portagee.

He wandered sadly to Torrelli’s, but Torrelli was not
friendly toward men who had neither money nor barterable property, and he gave Big Joe little solace; but
Torrelli did say that Datmy had inherited a house on

^ 124 ^

Tortilla Flat, and that all his friends lived there with

him.
AflEection and a desire to see his friends came to

Joe. In the evening he wandered

Big

up toward Tortilla

Flat to find Danny and Pilon. It was dusk as he walked

up the street, and on the way he met Pilon, hurrying
by in a businesslike way.
“Ai, Pilon. I was just coming to see you.”

“Hello, Joe Portagee,” Pilon was brusque.

“Where

you been?”
“In the army,” said Joe.
Pilon’s mind was not on the meeting. “I have to go

on*

**

“I will go with you,” said Joe.

Pilon stopped and surveyed him. “Don’t you remem-

ber what night it is?” he asked.

“No. What is it?”
“It is St. Andrew’s Eve.”

Then the Portagee knew; for this was the night when
every paisano

who wasn’t in jail wandered restlessly

through the forest. This was the night when all buried
treasure sent up a faint phosphorescent glow through

tbe ground. There was plenty of treasure in the woods,

^ 125

Monterey had been invaded many times in two
hundred years, and each time valuables had been hidden
too.

in the earth.

The night was clear. Pilon had emerged from his
hard daily shell, as he did now and then. He was the
idealist to-night, the giver of gifts.

This night he was

engaged in a mission of kindness.

“You may come with me. Big Joe Portagee, but if

we find any treasure I must decide what to do with it.
If you do not agree, you can go by yourself and look
for your own treasure.”

Big Joe was not an expert at directing his own efforts.
•"I will

go with you, Pilon,” he said. “1 don’t care about

the treasure.”

The night came down as tliey walked into the forest.
Their

feet

found the pine-needle beds.

Now Pilon

knew it for a perfect night. A high fog covered the sky,
and behind it, the moon shone so tliat the forest was
filled

with a gauze-like light. There was none of the

sharp outline we think of as reality. The tree trunks

were not black columns of wood, but soft and unsubstantial shadows.

The patches of brush were formless

and shifting in the queer light. Ghosts could walk freely

^ 126

to-night, without fear of the disbelief of men; for •ais

night was haunted, and it would be an insensitive man

who did not know it.

Now and then Pilon and Big Joe passed other aearchwho wandered restlessly, zig-zagging among the
pines. Their heads were down and they moved silently

ers

and passed no greeting. Who could say whether all of

them were really living men? Joe and Pilon knew that
some were shades of those old folk who had buried the
treasures, and who, on Saint Andreiv’s Eve, waadcred
back to the earth to see that their gold tvas undisUi/oed.
Pilon wore his saint’s medallion, hung around his aeck,
outside his clothes; so he had no fear of the spirits. Big

Joe walked with his fingers crossed in the Holy Siga

Although diey might be frightened, they knew they

had protection more than adequate to cope with the
unearthly night.

The wind arose as they walked, and drove the fog
across the pale moon like a thin wash of gray water
color. The moving fog gave shifting form to tlie forest,
so that every tree crept stealthily along and the bushes

moved soundlessly, like great dark cats. The tree-tops
in the wind talked huskily, told fortunes and foretold

^ 127 ^

deaths. Pilon knew it was not good to listen to the talk-

ing of the trees.
future;

No good ever came of knowing the

and besides, this whispering was unholy.

He

turned die attention of his ears from the trees’ talking.

He began a zig-zag path through the forest, and Big
Joe walked beside him

like

silent men passed them,

and went on without a greet-

a great alert dog. Lone

ing: and the dead passed them noiselessly, and went on

widiout a greeting.

The fog siren began its screaming on the Point, far
below them; and it wailed its sorrow for all the good
ships that had drotvned on the iron reef, and for all

diQse others that would sometime die there.

Pilon shuddered and felt cold, although the night

was warm. He whispered a Hail Mary under his breath.
Tliey passed a gray man who walked with his head

down, and ivho gave them no greeting.

An hour went by, and stiU Pilon and Big Joe wandered as restlessly as the dead who crowded the night

Suddenly Pilon stopped. His hand found Big Joe's
arm. “Do you see?” he whispered.

“Where?"
"Right ahead there.”

^ 128 {§

"Ye-s-I think so.”
It seemed to Pilon that he could see a soft pillax-iof

blue light that shone out of the ground ten yard&.ah£ad
of him.

“Big Joe,” he whispered, “find two sticks about three
or four feet long. I do not want to look away. I might
lose it.”

He stood like a pointing dog while Big Joe scurried
off to find tlie sticks.

Pilon heard him break two small

dead limbs from a pine tree. And he heard the snaps as
Big Joe broke the twigs from his sticks. And still Pil^
stared at the pale shaft of nebulous light. So faint it

was that sometimes it seemed to disappear altogether.

Sometimes he was not sure he saw it at all. He did not

move his eyes when Big Joe put the sticks in his hands.
Piion crossed the sticks at right angles and advanced
slowly, holding the cross in front of him. As he came
close, the light seemed to fade away, but he saw where
it

had come from, a perfectly round depression in the

pine needles.
Pilon laid his cross over the depression, and he ^d,
“All that lies here is mine by discovery. Go awayj all
—*>4

evil spirits.

Go away, spirits of men who buried #his

^ 129

treasure, In

Nomen Patris et Filius et Sptritu Sanctt,"

and then he heaved a great sigh and sat down on the
ground.

“We have found it, oh my friend. Big Joe,” he cried.
“For many years I have looked, and now I have found
it.”

“Let’s dig,” said Big Joe.

But Pilon shook his head impatiently. “WTien all the
spirits are free?

When even to be here is dangerous?

You are a fool. Big Joe. We will sit here until morning;
and then we will mark the place, and to-morrow night

we will dig. No one else can see the light now that we
have covered it with the cross. To-morrow night there
will be no danger.”

The night seemed more fearful now that they sat in
the pine needles, but the cross sent out a warmth of
holiness and safety, like a little bonfire on the ground.

Like a fire, however, it only warmed the front of them.

Their backs were to the cold and evil things that wandered about in the forest.
Pilon got up and drew a big circle around the whole
place, and he was inside when he closed the circle. “Let

DO evil thing cross this line, in the Name of the Most

^ 130 ^

Holy Jesus,” he chanted. Then he sat down again. Both
he and Big Joe felt better. They could hear the mufiSied
ftxitsteps of the weary wandering ghosts; they could see

the little lights that glowed from the transparent forms
as;they walked by; but their protecting line was impregnable. Nothing bad from this world or from any
other; world could cross into the circle.

“What are you going to do with the money?” Big
Joe asked.
Pilon looked at him with contempt. "You have never

looked for treasure, Big Joe Portagee, for you do not

know how to go about it. I cannot keep this treasure
for myself. If I go after it intending to keep it, then the

treasure will dig itself down and down like a clam in

the sand, and I shall never find it. No, that is not the

way. I am digging this treasure for Danny.”

AH the idealism in Pilon came out then. He told Big
Joe how good Danny was to his friends.

"And we do nothing for him,” he said. "We pay no
rent: Sometimes we get drunk and break the furniture.

We fight with Danny when we are angry with him, and
we <311 him names. Oh, we are very bad. Big Joe. And
80 all of us, Pablo and Jesus Maria and the Pirate and

^ 132 ^

I talked and planned.

We are all in the woods, to-night,

And the treasure is to be for
Danny. He is so good. Big Joe. He is so kind; and we
looking for treasure.

are so bad. But if we take a great sack of treasure to

him, then he will be glad. It is because my heart is clean
of selfishness that I can find this treasure?”

“Won’t you keep any of it?” Big Joe asked, incredulous. “Not even for a gallon of wine?”

Pilon had no speck of the Bad Pilon in

him this

night. “No, not one scrap of gold! Not one little brown

penny! It is all for Danny, every bit.”

Joe was disappointed. “I walked all this way, and I
won’t even get a glass of wine for it,” he mourned.

“When Danny has tlie money,” Pilon said delicately,
“it may be that he will buy a little wine. Of course I
shall not suggest it, for this treasure is Danny’s.

But I

think maybe he might buy a little wine. And then if

you were good to him, you might get a glass.”
Big Joe was comforted, for he had known Danny a
long time. He thought it possible that Danny might b*jiy

a great deal of wine.

The night passed on over them. The moon went
down and left the forest in mufBed darkness. 'The fog

^ 133 £§

siren screamed and screamed. During the whole night

Pilon remained unspotted. He preached a little to Big

Joe as recent converts are likely to do.
“It is worth while to be kind and generous,” he said.

“Not only do such actions pile up a house of joy in
Heaven; but there is, too, a quick reward here on earth.

One feels.a golden warmth glowing like a hot enchilada
in one’s stomach. The Spirit of God clothes one in a
coat as soft as camel’s hair. I have not always been a

good man. Big Joe Portagee. I confess it freely.”
Big Joe knew it perfectly well.
“I have been bad.” Pilon continued ecstatically.

He

was enjoying himself thoroughly. “I have lied and
stolen. I

have been lecherous. I have committed adul-

tery and taken God’s name in vain.”

"Me too,” said Big Joe happily.
“And what was the result. Big Joe Portagee? I have
had a mean feeling. I have known I would go to Hell.
But now I see that the sinner is never so bad that he cannot be forgiven. Although I have not yet been to confession, I can feel that

the change in me is pleasing to

God, for His grace is upon me. If you, too, would change
your ways. Big Joe, if you would give up drunkenness

and fighting and those girls down at Dora Williams*
House, you too might feel as I do.”

But Big Joe had gone to sleep. He. never stayed awake
very long when he was not moving about

The grace was not quite so sharp to Pilon when he
could not tell Big Joe about it, but he sat and watched
the treasure place while the sky grayed and the dawn

came behind the fog. He saw the pine trees take shape
and emerge out of obscurity. The wind died down and
the little blue rabbits came out of the brush and hopped

about on the pine needles. Pilon was heavy-eyed but
happy.

When it was light he stirred Big Joe Portagee with
his foot. “It is time to go to Danny’s house. The day has

come.” Pilon threw the cross away, for it was no longer
needed, and he erased the circle. “Now,” he said, "we

must make no mark, but we must remember this by
trees

and rocks.”

“Why don’t we dig now?” Big Joe asked.
“And everybody in Tortilla Flat would come to help
us,” Pilon said sarcastically.

They looked hard at the surroundings, saying, “Now
there are three trees together on the right, and two on

^ 135 13

the left. That patch of brush is down there, and here is

a rock.” At last they walked away from the treasure,

memorizing the way as they went.

At Danny’s house they found tired friends. "Did you
fiftd any?” the friends

demanded.

"No,” said Pilon quickly, to forestall Joe’s confession.
"Well, Pablo thought he saw the light, but
app'bared before he got to it. And the Pirate

it dis-

saw the

gjtost of an old woman, and she had his dog with her.”

The Pirate broke into a smile. “That old woman
told me my dog was happy now,” he said.

"Here is Big Joe Portagee, back from the army,” an-

nounced Pilon.
“Hello, Joe.”

“You got a nice place here,” said tlie Portagee, and
let himself down easily into a chair.

“You keep out of my bed,” said Danny, for he knew
that Joe Portagee had come to stay. The way he sat in

a chair and crossed his knees had an appearance of
permanence.

The Pirate went out, and took his wheelbarrow and
started into the forest to cut his kindlings; but the other

^ 136 ^

five

men lay down in the sunshine that broke through

the fog, and in a little while they were asleep.
It was

mid-aftemoon before any of them awakened

At last they stretched their arms and sat up and looked
listlessly

down at the bay below, where a brown oil

tanker moved slowly out to sea. The Pirate had left the
bags on die table, and the friends opened them and

brought out the food die Pirate had collected.

Big Joe walked down the path toward the sagging
gate. “See you later," he called to Pilon.

Pilon anxiously watched him until he saw that Big

Joe was headed down the hill to Monterey, not up to-

ward the pine forest. The four friends sat down and
dreamily watdied the evening come.

At dusk Joe Portagee returned. He and Pilon conferred in die yard, out of earshot of the house.

“We will borrow tools from Mrs. Morales,” Pilon
said. “A shovel and a pick-ax stand by her chicken
house.”

When it was quite dark they started. “We go to see
some girls, friends of Joe Portagee’s,” Pilon explained.

They crept into Mrs. Morales’ yard and borrowed the

^ 137

me, Pilon. The other one was bigger. Danny will get
it

back when we find the treasure.”
Pilon whirled him around and kicked him with ac-

curacy and fire. “Pig,” he said, “dirty thieving cow

You

will get the blanket back or I will beat you to ribbons.”

Big Joe tried to placate him. “I thought how we are

working for Danny,” he whispered. “I thought. ‘Danny
will be so glad, he can buy a hundred new blankets.’ ”

“Be still,” said Pilon. "You will get that same blanket
back or I will beat you with a rock.” He took up the
jug and uncorked it and drank a little to soothe his
frayed sensibilities; moreover he drove the cork back

and refused the Portagee even a drop. "For this theft
you must do all the digging. Pick up those tools and

come with me.”
Big Joe ivhined like a puppy, and obeyed. He could
not stand against the righteous fury of Pilon

They tiled to find the treasure for a long time. It was
late

when

Pilon pointed to three trees in a row,

“There!” he said.

They searched about until they found the depression
in the ground. There was a little moonlight to guide

them, for this night the sky was free of fog.

^ 139 ^

Now that he was not going to dig, Pilon developed a
new theory for uncovering treasure. “Sometimes the

money is in sacks,” he said, “and the sacks are rotted.
If you dig straight down you might lose some ”

He drew

a generous circle around the hollow. “Now, dig a deep
trench around, and then

we

will

come up on the

treasure.”'

“Aren’t you going to dig?” Big Joe asked.

“Am I a thief of blankets?”
he cried. “Do I steal from the bed of my friend who
Pilon broke into fury.

shelters

me?”

“Well, I ain’t going to do all the digging,” Big Joe
said.

Pilon picked up one of tlie pine limbs that only the
night before had served as part of the cross.

He ad-

vanced ominously toward Big Joe Portagee. “Thief,”

he snarled. “Dirty pig of an untrue friend. Take up
that shovel.”

Big Joe’s courage flowed away, and he stooped for the
shovel on the ground. If Joe Portagee’s conscience had

not been bad, he might have remonstrated; but his
fear of Pilon, armed with a righteous cause and a stick

of pine wood, was great.

^ 140

Big Joe abhorred the whole principle of shoveling.

The line of the moving shovel was unattractive. The
end to be gained, that of taking dirt from one place and
putting it in another, was, to one who held the larger
vision, silly and gainless.

A whole lifetime of shoveling

could accomplish practically nothing. Big Joe’s reacdon

was a little more simple than this.

He didn’t like to

shovel. He had joined the army to fight, and had done

nothing but dig.

But Pilon stood over him, and the trench stretched
around the treasure place. It did no good to profess
sickness, hunger or weakness. Pilon was inexorable, and

Joe’s crime of the blanket was held against

him. Al-

though he whined, complained, held up his hands to

show how they were hurt, Pilon stood over him and
forced the digging.

Midnight came, and the trench was three feet down.

The roosters of Monterey crowed. The moon sank behind the trees. At last Pilon gave the word to move in
on the treasure. The bursts of dirt came slowly now;
Big Joe was exhausted. Just before daylight, his shovel
struck something hard.
“Ai,” he cried. “We have it, Pilon.”

'

The find was large and square. Frantically they dug
at it in the dark, and they could not see

it.

“Careful,” Pilon cautioned. “Do not hurt it.”

The daylight came before they had it out. Pilon felt
metal and leaned down in the gray light to see. It was
a good-sized square of concrete. On the top was a round

brown plate. Pilon spelled out the words on it:
“United States Geodetic Survey

1915

+ Elevation

600 Feet.”
Pilon sat down in the pit and his shoulders sagged
in defeat.

"No treasure?” Big Joe asked plaintively.
Pilon did not answer him.

The Portagee inspected

the cement post and his brow wrinkled with thought.

He turned to the sorrowing Pilon. “Maybe we can take
this good piece of metal and sell it.”

Pilon peered up out of his dejection. “Johnny Pom-

pom found one,” he said with a quietness of great disappointment “Johnny Pom-pom took the metal piece

and tried to sell it. It is a year in jail to dig one of these
up,” Pilon mourned. "A year in jail and two thousand
dollar fine.” In his pain, Pilon wanted only to get away

from this tragic place

He stood up, found a weed in

^ 142 ^

which to wrap the wine bottle, and started down the
hill.

Big Joe trotted after him solicitously. “Where arc

we going?” he asked.
“I don’t know,” said Pilon.

The day was bright when they arrived at the beach;
but even there Pilon did not stop. He trudged along the
hard sand by the water’s edge until Monterey was far

behind and only the sand dunes of Seaside and the
rippling waves of the bay were there to see his sorrow.

At last he sat in the dry sand, with the sun warming
him. Big Joe sat beside him, and he felt that in some

way he was responsible for Pilon’s silent pain.
Pilon took the jug out of its weed and uncorked it

and drank deeply, and because sorrow is tlie mother of
a general compassion, he passed Joe’s wine to the miscreant Joe.

“How we build,” Pilon cried. “How our dreams lead
us. I had thought- how we would carry bags of gold to

Danny. I could see how his face would look. He would
be surprised. For a long time he would not believe it.”

He took the bottle from Joe Portagee and drank colossally. “All this is gone, blown away in the night.”

^ 143 ^

The sun was warming the beach now. In spite of his
disappointment, Pilon felt a traitorous comfort stealing
5ver him, a treacherous impulse to discover some good
points in the situation.

Big Joe, in his quiet way, was drinking more than
his share of the wine. Pilon took it indignantly

and

drank again and again.

“But after all,” he said philosophically, “maybe if we

had found gold, it might not have been good for Danny.

He has always been a poor man. Riches might make him
crazy.”

Big Joe nodded solemnly. The wine went down and

down in the bottle.
“Happiness is better than riches,” said Pilon. “If we
try to make Danny happy, it will be a better thing than

to give him money.”

Big Joe nodded again and took off his shoes. “Make

him happy. That’s the stuff.”
Pilon turned sadly upon him. “You are only a pig,

and not fit to live with men,” he said gently. “You who
stole Daimy’s blanket should be kept in a sty and fed

potato peelings.”

They were getting very sleepy in the warm sun. The

^ 144 ^

little

waves whispered along the beach. Pilon took oft

his shoes.

"Even Stephen,” said Big Joe, and they drained the
jug to the last drop.

The beach was swaying gently, heaving and falling
with a movement like a ground-swell.

"You aren’t a bad man,” Pilon said. But Big Joe
Portagee was already asleep. Pilon took off his coat and
laid it over his face. In a

few moments, he too was

sleeping sweetly.

The sun wheeled over the sky. The tide spread up
tlie beach,

and then retreated. A squad of scampering

kildeers inspected the sleeping men.
sniffed them.

A wandering dog

Two elderly ladies, collecting seashells,

saw the bodies and hurried past lest these men should

awaken in passion, pursue and criminally assault them.
It was a shame, they agreed, that the police did nothing

to control such matters. "They are drunk,” one said.

And the other stared back up the beach at the sleeping men. "Drunken beasts,” she agreed.

When at last the sun went behind the pines of the
hill in back of Monterey,

Pilon awakened. His mouth

^ 145 ^
1

was as dry as alum; his head ached and he was suflE from
the hard sand. Big Joe snored on.
“Joe,” Pilon cried, but the Portagee was beyond call.

Pilon rested on his elbow and stared out to sea. “A little

wine would be good for my dry mouth,” he thought.

He tipped up the jug and got not a single drop to soothe
his dry tongue. Then he turned out his pockets in the

hope that while he slept some miracle had taken place
there; but none had

There was a broken pocket knife

for which he had been refused a glass of wine at least

twenty times There was a fish-hook in a cork, a piece of
dirty string, a dog’s tooth and several keys that fit noth-

ing Pilon knew of. In the whole lot was not a thing
Torrelli

would consider as worth having, even in a

moment of insanity.
Pilon looked speculatively at Big Joe. “Poor fellow,”

he thought. “When Joe Portagee wakes up, he will feel
as dry as I do. He will like it if I have a little wine

for

him.” He pushed Big Joe roughly several times; and

when the Portagee only mumbled, and then snored
again, Pilon looked through his pockets.
brass pants button, a little metal disk

^ 146

He found a

which said “Good

Eats at the Dutchman,” four or five headless matches

and a little piece of chewing tobacco.
Pilon sat back on his heels. So it was no use

He must

wither here on the beach while his throat called lustily
for wine.

He noticed the serge trousers the Portagee was wearing,

and stroked them with his fingers. “Nice cloth,”

he thought. “Why should this dirty Portagee wear such

good cloth when all his friends go about in jeans?”

Then he remembered how badly the pants fit Big Joe,
how tight the waist was even with two fly-buttons undone,

how the cuffs missed the shoe tops by inches.

“Some one of a decent size would be happy in those
pants.”

Pilon remembered Big Joe’s crime against Danny,

and he became an avenging angel. How did this big
black Portagee dare to insult

Danny sol “When he

wakes up I will beat him! But,” the more subtle Pilon
argued, “his crime was theft. Would it not teach him a
lesson to know how it feels to have something stolen?

What good is punishment unless something is learned?”
It

was a triumphant position for Pilon. If, with one

action, he could avenge Danny, discipline Big Joe, teach

^ 147 ^

an ethical lesson and get a little wine, who in tlie world
a}uld criticize him?

He pushed the Portagee vigorously, and Big Joe
brushed at him as though he were a fly. Pilon deftly

removed the trousers, rolled them up and sauntered

away into the sand dunes.
Torrelli was out, but Mrs. Torrelli opened the door
to Pilon. He was mysterious in his manner, but at last

he held up the pants for her inspection.
She shook her head decisively.

"But look," said Pilon. "You are seeing only the spots

and the dirt. Look at this fine cloth underneath. Think,
sefioral

You have cleaned the spots off and pressed the

trousers! Torrelli

comes in!

He is silent; he is glum.

And then you bring him these fine pants! See how his
eyes grow bright! See how happy he is! He takes you on
his lap! Look how he smiles at you, senora! Is so much

happiness too high at one gallon of red wine?’”

“The seat of the pants is thin,” she said.

He held them up to the light. “Can you see through
them? No! The stiffness, the discomfort is taken out of
them. They are in prime condition."

“No,” she said firmly.

^ 148

“You are cruel to your husband, senora. You deny

him happiness. I should not be surprised to see him
going to other women, who are not so heartless. For a
quart, then?”

Finally her resistance was beaten down and she gave

him the quart. Pilon drank it off immediately. “You try
to break down the price of pleasure,” he warned her.

“I should have half a gallon.”

Mrs. Torrelli was hard as stone. Not a drop more

could Pilon get. He sat there brooding in the kitchen.
“Jewess, that’s what she is. She cheats me out of Big
Joe’s pants.”

Pilon thought sadly of his friend out there on the
beach.

What could he do? If he came into town he

would be arrested. And what had this harpy done to
deserve the pants? She had tried to buy Pilon’s friend’s

pants for a miserable quart of miserable wine. Pilon
felt himself dissolving into anger at her.

“I am going away in a moment,” he told Mrs. Tor*
relli.

The pants were hung in a little alcove off the

kitchen.

“Good-by,” said Mrs. Torrelli over her shoulder. She

went into her little pantry to prepare dinner.

^ H9

On his way out Pilon passed the alcove and lifted
down not only the pants, but Danny’s blanket.
Pilon walked back down the beach, toward the pla<«
where he had left Big Joe. He could see a bonfire burning brightly on the sand, and as he drew nearer, a num-

ber of small dark figures passed in front of the flame.
It was very

dark now; he guided himself by the fire.

As he came close, he saw that it was a Girl Scout wienie
bake. He approached warily.

For a while he could not see Big Joe, but at last he
discovered him, lying half covered with sand, speechless

with cold and agony. Pilon walked firmly

up to

him and held up the pants
“Take them. Big Joe, and be glad you have them
back.”
Joe’s teeth

were chattering.

“Who stole my pants,

Pilon? I have been lying here for hours,

and I could

not go away because of those girls.”
Pilon obligingly stood between Big Joe and the little
girls

who were running about the bonfire. The Portagee

brushed the cold damp sand from his legs and put on
his pants. They walked side by side along the dark beach

toward Monterey, where the lights htmg, necklace above
1£0

necklace against the

hill.

The sand dunes crouched

along the back of the beach like tired hounds, resting;

and the waves gently practiced at striking, and hissed
a little. The night was cold and aloof, and its warm
life was withdrawn, so that it was full of bitter warnings

to man that he is alone in the world, and alone among
his fellows; that

he has no comfort owing him from

anywhere.
Pilon was

still

brooding, and Joe Portagee sensed

the depth of his feeling

toward his friend.

At last Pilon turned his head

“We learn by this that it is great

foolishness to trust a woman,” he said.

“Did some woman take my pants?” Big Joe demanded
excitedly. “Who was it?

I’ll

kick the hell out of her!”

But Pilon shook his head as sadly as old Jehovah,
who, resting on the seventh day, sees that his world is
tiresome. “She is punished,” Pilon said. “You might say

she punished herself, and that is the best way. She nad
thy pants; she bought them with greed; and now she
has them not.”

These things were beyond Big Joe. They were mysteries it was better to let alone;

and this was as Pilon

wished it. Big Joe said humbly, “Thanks for getting my

^

151

pants back, Pilon.”

But Pilon was so sunk in philos-

ophy that even thanks were valueless.
“It was nothing,” he said. "In the whole matter only

the lesson we leam has any value.”

They climbed up from the beach and passed the great
silver tower of the gas works.

Big Joe Portagee was happy to be with Pilon. “Here

who takes care of his friends,” he thought. “Even
when they sleep he is alert to see that no harm comes
is one

to them.” He resolved to do something nice for Pilon

sometime.

IX
How Danny was ensnared by a vacuum<leaneT and
how Danny’s Friends rescued him.

Dolores

Engracia

Ram-

irez lived in her own little house on the upper edge of

Tortilla Flat. She did housework for some of the ladies

in Monterey,

and she belonged to the Native Daugh-

ters of the Golden West.

She was not pretty, this lean-

faced paisana, but there was in her figure

a certain

voluptuousness of movement; there was in her voice a
throatiness some men found indicative. Ker eyes could

bum behind a mist with a sleepy passion which those
men, to whom the flesh is important, found attractive

and downright inviting.
In her brusque moments she was not desirable, but

an amorous combination came about within her often

^ 153 ^

enough so that she was called Sweets Ramirez on Tortilla Flat.

It was a pleasant thing to see her when the beast in

her was protvling. How she leaned over her front gate!

How her voice purred drowsily! How her hips moved
gently about, now pressing against the fence, now swell-

ing back like a sumfmer beach-wave, and then pressing
the fence again! Who in the world could put so much

husky meaning into “Ai, amigo. A’onde vas?”
It is true that ordinarily her voice was shrill, her face

hard and sharp as a hatchet, her figure lumpy and her
intentions selfish. The softer self came into possession

only once or twice a week, and then, ordinarily, in the
evening.

When Sweets heard that Danny was an heir, she was
glad for him. She dreamed of being his lady, as did every

other female on Tortilla Flat. In the evenings she leaned

over the front gate waiting for the time when he would
pass by and fall into her trap

But for a long time her

baited trap caught nothing but poor Indians and pai-

sanos who owned no houses,

and whose clothes were

sometimes fugitive from better wardrobes.
Sweets was not content.

Her house was up the hill

frcMH Danny’s house, in a direction he did not often
take. Sweets could not go looking for

him. She was a

lady, and her conduct was governed by very strict rules

of propriety. If

Danny should walk by, now, if they

should talk, like the old friends they were, if he should

come in for a social glass of wine; and then, if nature
proved too strong, and her feminine resistance too
weak, there was no grave breach of propriety. But it

was unthinkable to leave her web on the front gate.

For many months of evenings she waited in vain, and
took such gifts as walked by in jeans. But there are only
a limited number of pathways on Tortilla Flat. It was
inevitable that Danny should, sooner or later, pass the

gate of Dolores Engracia Ramirez; and so he did.

In all the time they had known each other, there had
never been an occasion when it was more to Sweets’ advantage to have him walk by; for Danny had only that

morning found a keg of copper shingle nails, lost by the
Central Supply Company. He had judged them jetsam

because no member of the company was anywhere neat.

Danny removed the copper nails from the keg and put
them in a sack. Then, borrowing the Pirate’s wheelbarrow, and the Pirate to push it, he took his salvage to

^ *55 ^

the Western Supply Company, where
for three dollars. The keg he gave

he sold the copper

to the Pirate.

“You can keep things in it,” he said. That

made the

Pirate very happy.

And now Danny came down the hill, aimed with
fine accuracy toward the house o£

a

Torrelli, and the three

dollars were in his pocket.

Dolores’ voice sounded as huskily sweet
of a bumble-bee. “Ai, amigo, a onde

as the drone

vas?

Danny stopped. A revolution took place in his plans.

"How are you. Sweets?”
“What difference is it how I am? None of my friends
are interested,” she said archly.

And her hips fioated

in a graceful and circular undulation.

“What do you mean?” he demanded.
“Well, does my friend Danny ever come to see me?”
“I am here to see thee now,” he said gallantly.

She opened the gate a little. “Wilt thou come in for
a tiny glass of wine in friendship’s name?” Danny went
into her house. “What hast thou been doing in the forest?” she cooed.

Then he made an error. He told vaingloriously of his

^ 156 ^

transaction

up the hill, and he boasted of his three

dollars.

“Of course

I

have only enough wine to

fill

two

thimbles,” she said.

They sat in Sweets’ kitchen and drank a glass of wine.
In a little while Danny assaulted her virtue with true
gallantry and vigor. He found to his amazement, a re^
sistance out of all proportion to her size and reputation.

The ugly beast of lust was awakened in him. He was
angry.

Only when he was leaving was the way made

clear to him.

The husky voice said, “Maybe you would like to
come and see me this evening, Danny.” Sweets’ eyeu
swam in a mist of drowsy invitation. “One has neigh
bors,” she suggested with delicacy.

'Then he understood. "I will come back,” he prom
ised.

It was mid-afternoon. Danny walked down the street,

re-aimed at Torrelli’s;

and the beast in him had

changed. From a savage and snarling wolf it had be-

come a great, shaggy, sentimental bear. “I wiU take
wine to that nice Sweets,” he thought.

On the way down, whom should he meet but Pabk^

^ 157 ^

and Pablo had two sticks of gum. He gave one to Danny

and fell into step. "Where goest thou?”
“It is

no time tor friendship,” Danny said tartly.

“First I go to buy a little wine to take to a lady. You

may come with me, and have one glass only. I am tired
of buying wine for ladies, only to have my friends drink
it all

up.”

Pablo agreed that such a practice was unendurable.

For himself, he didn't want Danny’s wine, but only his
companionship.

They went to Torrelh’s. They had a glass of wine out
of the new bought gallon. Danny confessed that it was

shabby treatment to give his friend only one little glass.

Over Pablo’s passionate

protest

they

had another.

“Ladies,” Danny thought, "should not drink too much
jwine.

They were apt to become silly; and besides, it

dulled some of those senses one liked to find alert in a

ll^^J^^They had a few more glasses. Half a gallon of

wne was a bountiful present, especially as Danny was
about to go down to buy another present. They measinred

down half a gallon, and drank what was over.

Then Danny hid the jug in the weeds in a ditch.

^ 158 ^

“I would like you to come with me to buy the present, Pablo,”

he said.

Pablo knew the reason for the invitation. Half of
it was a

desire for Pablo’s company, and half was fear

of leaving the wine while Pablo was at large.

They

walked with studied dignity and straightness down the
hill to Monterey.

Mr. Simon, of Simon’s Investment, Jewelry and Loan

Company, welcomed them into his store. The name of
the store defined the outward limits of the merchandise
the company sold; for there were saxophones, radios,
rifles, knives,

fishing-rods and old coins on the counter;

all second-hand,

but all really better than new because

they were just well broken-in.

“Something you would like to see?” Mr. Simon asked“Yes,” said Danny.

The proprietor named over a tentative list, and then
stopped in the middle of a word, for he saw tliat Danny

was looking at a large aluminum vacuum-cleaner. The
dust-bag was blue and yellow checks. The electric cord

was long and black and slick. Mr. Simon went to it and

rubbed it with his hand, and stood off and admired it
“Something in a vacuum<leaner?” he asked.

^ 159 ^

“How much?”
“For this one, fourteen dollars.” It was not a
so much as an endeavor to find out

price

how much Danny

had. And Danny wanted it, for it was

large and shiny.

No woman of Tortilla Flat had one. In this moment he
Flat. He laid
forgot there was no electricity on Tortilla
his

two dollars on the counter and waited while the

explosion took place; the fury, the rage, the

sadness, the

poverty, the rum, the cheating. The polish

was invoked,

the color of the bag, the extra long cord,

tlie

value of

the metal alone. And when it was all over, Danny

went

out carrying the vacuum-cleaner.

Often as a pasatiempo in the afternoon. Sweets
brought out the vacuum-cleaner and leaned it against
a chair. While her friends looked on, she pushed it back

and fortli to show how easily it rolled. And she made
a humming with her voice to imitate a motor.

“My friend is a rich man,” she said. “I think pretty
soon there will be wires full of electricity coming right
into the house, and then zip and zip and zipl And you

have the house clean!”

Her friends tried to belittle tire present, saying, “It
is

too bad you can’t run this machine.” And, “I have

^ 160

always held that a broom and dust-pan, properly used,
are more thorough.”

But their envy could do nothing against the vacuum.

Through its possession, Sweets climbed to the peak of
the social scale of Tortilla Flat. People

who did not

remember her name referred to her as “that one with

the sweeping-machine.” Often when her enemies passed

the house. Sweets could be seen through the window,

pushing the cleaner back and forth, while a loud hum-

ming came from her throat. Indeed, after she had swept
her house every day, she pushed the cleaner about on
the theory that of course it would clean better with
electricity,

but one could not have everything.

^ i6i ^

manner be-

abe excited envy in many houses. Her
chin high
dignified and gracious, and she held her

came

as befitted

one who had a sweeping-machine. In her
mornshe included it. “Ramon passed this

conversation
ing,

while

I

was

pushing the

sweeping-machine

not three
“Louise Meater cut her hand this morning,
sweeping-machine.”
hours after I had been pushing the
Her
But in her elevation she did not neglect Danny.
voice growled with emotion when

he was about. She

swayed like a pine tree in the wind. And he

spent every

evening at the house of Sweets.

At first his friends ignored his absence, for it is the
affairs. But as
right of every man to have these little
the weeks went on, and as a rather violent
life

domestic

began to make Danny listless and pale, his friends

became convinced that Sweets’ gratitude for tlie sweeping-machine was not to Danny’s best physical interests.

They were jealous of a situation that was holding his
attention so long.

Pilon and Pablo and Jesus Maria Ctorcoran in turn
assaulted the nest of his affections during his absence;

but Sweets, while she was sensible of the compliment,
remained true to the man who had raised her position

^ 162 ^

to such a gratifying level. She tried to keep their friend-

ship for a future time of need, for she knew how fickle

fortune is; but she stoutly refused to share with Danny’s
friends that which was dedicated for the time being to

Danny.
Wherefore tire friends, in despair, organized a group,

formed for and dedicated to her destruction.
It may be that Danny, deep in his soul, was beginning

to tire of Sweets’ affection and the duty of attendance
it demanded. If such a change were taking place, he did

not admit it to himself.

At three o’clock one afternoon, Pilon and Pablo and
Jesus Maria, followed vaguely by Big Joe Portagce, re-

turned triumphant from three-quarters of a day of
strenuous effort. Their campaign had called into play

and taxed to the limit the pitiless logic of Pilon, the artistic

ingenuousness of Pablo and the gentleness and

humanity of Jesus Maria Corcoran. Big Joe had contributed nothing.

But now, like four hunters, they returned from the
chase more happy because their victory had been a difficult one.

And in Monterey, a poor puzzled Italian

^ i6$ ^

came gradually to the amviction

that

he had been

swindled.

Pilon carried a gallon jug of wine concealed in a

bundle of ivy. They marched joyfully into Danny’s
house and Pilon set the gallon on the table.

Danny, awakened out of a sound sleep, smiled quietly,
got up from bed and laid out the fruit jars. He poured
the wine. His four friends fell into chairs, for it had

been an exhausting day.

They drank quietly in the late afternoon, that time
of curious intermission. Nearly every one in Tortilla
Flat stops then

and considers those things that have

taken place in the day just past, and thinks over the
possibilities of the evening.

There are many things to

discuss in an afternoon.

“Cornelia Ruiz got a new man this morning,” Pilon
observed. “He has a bald head. His name is Kilpatrick.

Cornelia says her other man didn’t come home three
nights last week. She didn’t like that.”

“Cornelia

quickly,*’ said

own sure

a

is

woman who changes her mind too

Danny. He thought complacently of his

establishment,

built

vacuum-cleaner.

^ 164 0

on the rock of the

“Cornelia’s father was worse,” said Pablo. “He could

not tell the truth. Once he borrowed a dollar from me.
I have told Cornelia about it, and she does nothing.”

“Two of one blood. ‘Know the breed and know the
dog,’ ” Pilon quoted virtuously.

Danny poured the jars full of wine again, and the gallon was exhausted. He looked ruefully at it.
Jesus Maria, that lover of the humanities, spoke up
quietly. “I saw Susie Francisco, Pilon. She said the rec-

ipe worked fine. She has been out riding with Charlie

Guzman on his motorcycle three times The first two
times she gave him the love medicine it made him
sick. She thought it was no good. But now Susie says
you can have some cookies any time.”

“What was in that potion?” Pablo asked.
Pilon became secretive. “I cannot

tell

all

of it. 1

guess it must have been the poison oak in it that made

Charlie Guzman sick.”

The gallon of wine had gone too quickly. Each of the
six friends was conscious of a thirst so sharp that it was

a pain of

desire.

Pilon looked at his friends with

drooped eyes, and they looked back at him. The conspiracy was ready.

^ 165 ^

Pilon cleared his throat.

"What hast thou done,

Danny, to set the whole town laughing at thee?”

Danny looked worried. “WTiat do you mean?”
Pilon chuckled. “It is said by many that you bought
a sweeping-machine for a lady, and that machine will
not work unless wires are put into the house. Those
wires cost a great deal of money. Some people find this
present very funny.”

Danny grew uncomfortable. "That lady likes the
sweeping-machine,” he said defensively.

“Why not?” Pablo agreed. “She has told some people
that you have promised to put wires into her house so

the sweeping-machine will work.”

Danny looked even more perturbed. "Did she say
that?”

“So I was told.”
“Well, I will not,” Danny cried.
“If I did not think

it

funny, I should be angry to

hear my friend laughed at,” Pilon observed.

“What will you do when she asks for those wires?”
Jesus Maria asked.
“I will tell her no,” said Danny.

^ 166 ^

Pilon laughed. “I wish I could be there.

such a simple thing to tell that lady ‘no.’

It is

not

”

Danny felt that his friends were turning against him.
“What shall I do?” he asked helplessly.
Pilon gave the matter his grave consideration and

brought his realism to bear on the subject. “If that lady
did not have the sweeping-machine, she would not

want those wires,” he said.

The friends nodded in agreement.
“Therefore,” Pilon continued, “the thing to do

is

to remove the sweeping-machine.”

“Oh, she wouldn’t let me take it,” Danny protested

“Then we will help you,” said Pilon. “I will take
the machine, and in return you can take the lady a
present of a gallon of wine. She will not even know

where the sweeping-machine has gone

”

“Some neighbor will see you take it.”
"Oh, no,” said Pilon. “You stay here, Danny. I will
get the machine.”

Danny sighed with relief that his problem was assumed by his good friends.
There were few things going on in Tortilla Flat that

^ 167 3^

Pilon did not know. His mind made sharp little notes

of everything that his eyes saw or his ears heard.

He

knew that Sweets went to the store at four-thirty every
afternoon.

He depended upon this almost invariable

habit to put his plan into effect.
“It
it,”

is

better that you

do not know anything about

he told Danny.

In the yard Pilon had a gunny sack in readiness. With
his knife he cut a generous branch from the rose bush

and pushed it into the sack.

At Sweets’ house, he found her absent, as he had
expected and hoped she would be. “It is really Danny’s

machine,” he told himself.
It was a

moment’s work to enter the house, to put

the vacuum-cleaner in the sack and to arrange tlie rose

branch

artistically in

the sack’s mouth.

As he came out of the yard, he met Sweets. Pilon
took

off his

hat politely. “I stepped in to pass the

time,” he said.

“Will you stop now, Pilon?”

“No. I have business down in Monterey. It is late.”

“Where do you go with this rose bush?”

^ 168

“A man in Monterey is to buy it. A very fine rose
bush. See

how strong it is.”

“Stop in some other time. Pilon.”

He heard no cry of anger as he walked sedately down
the street. “Perhaps she will not miss it for a while,”

he thought.
Half the problem was solved, but half was yet to be
approached. “What can Danny do with

this

sweeping-

machine?” Pilon asked himself. “If he lias it, Sweets
will know he has taken

it.

Can I throw it away? No,

for it is valuable. The thing to do would be to get rid

of it, and still to reap the benefit of its value.”

Now the whole problem was solved. Pilon headed
down the hill toward Torrelli’s house.
It

was a lai^e and shining vacuum-cleaner.

When

Pilon came again up the hill, he had a gallon of wine
in each hand.

The friends received him in silence when he entered
Danny’s house.
other on the

He set one jug on the table and the

floor.

“I have brought you a present to take to the lady,”

he told Danny. “And here is a little wine for us.”

^ 169 ^

1

They gathered happily, for their thirst was a raging
fire.

When the first gallon was far gone, Pilon held

his glass to the candle-light

and looked through

it.

“Things that happen are of no importance,” he said.

“But from everything that happens, there is a lesson to
'

be learned. By this we learn that a present, especially
to a lady, should have no quality that will require a
further present. Also we learn that it is sinful to give
presents of too great value, for they may excite greed.”

The first gallon was gone. The friends looked at
Danny to see how he felt about it. He had been very
quiet, but now he saw that his friends were waiting
on him.
“That lady was lively,” he said judiciously. “That
lady had a very sympathetic nature. But
iti”

God damn

he said, “I’m sick of it!” He went to tlie second

jug and drew the cork.

The Pirate, sitting in the comer among his dogs,
smiled to himself and whispered in admiration, “ ‘God

damn it, I’m sick of it.’ ” 'That, thought the Pirate,
was very

fine.

’They had not

more than half finished the second

jug, indeed they had sung only two songs, when young

^ 170 ^

Johnny Pom-pom came in. ‘I was at Torelli’s,” Johnny
said.
is

"Oh, that Torrelli is mad!

He is shouting! He

beating on the table with his fists.”

The friends looked up with mild interest. "Something has happened. It

is

probable Torrelli deserves

it.”

“Often he has refused his good customers a little
glass of wine.”

“What is the matter with Torrelli?” Pablo asked.
Johnny Pom-pom accepted a jar of wine. “Torrelli
says

he bought a sweeping-machine from Pilon, and

when he hooked it up to his light wire, it would not
work. So he looked on the inside, and it had no motor.

He says he will kill Pilon.”
Pilon looked shocked. “I did not know this machine

was at

fault,”

he said. “But did

I

not say Torrelli

deserved what was the matter with him. That machine

was worth three or four gallons of wine, but that miser
Torrelli

would give no more than two.”

Danny still felt a glow of gratitude toward Pilon,

He smacked his lips on his wine. “This stuff of Torrelli’s is getting worse and worse,” he said.

^ 171 ^

“At its best,

it is swill

the pigs leave, but lately it is so

bad that

Charlie Marsh even would not drink it.”

They all felt a little bit revenged on Torrelli then.
“I think,” said Danny, “that we will buy our wine
some place else, if Torrelli does not look out.

X
How the Friends solaced a CorporaJ. and in return
received a lesson in paternal ethics.

J Esus Maria Corcoran
was a pathway for the humanities. SufEering he tried
to relieve; sorrow he tried to assuage; happiness he
shared.

No hard nor haunted Jesus Maria existed. His

heart was free for the use of any one who had a use
for it. His resources and wits were at the disposal of

any oat who had less of either than had Jesus Maria.

He it was who carried Jos6 de la Nariz four miles
when Josh’s leg was broken. When Mrs. Palochico lost
the goat of her heart, the good goat of milk and dieese,
it

was Jesus Maria who tracked that goat to Big Joe

Portagee and halted the murder and made Big Joe give

who once picked Charlie
Marsh out of a ditch where he lay in his own filth, a
it

back. It was Jesus Maria

^ 173

deed which required not only a warm heart, but a
strong stomach.

Together with

his capacity for

doing good, Jesus

Maria had a gift for coming in contact with situations

where good wanted doing.
Such was his reputation that Pilon had once said,
“If that Jesus Maria had gone into the Church,

Mon-

terey would have had a saint for the calendar, I tell

you.”

Out of some deep pouch in his soul, Jesus Maria
drew kindness that renewed itself by withdrawal.
It was Jesus

Maria’s practice to go to the post office

every day, first because there he could see many people

whom he knew, and second because on that windy post
ofiBce corner he could
girls. It

look at the legs of a great many

must not be supposed that in this latter in-

terest there was any vulgarity.

As soon criticize a man

who goes to art galleries or to concerts. Jesus Maria
liked to look at girls’ legs.

One day when he had leaned against the post office
for two hours with very little success,

to a pitiful scene.

he was witness

A policeman came along the side-

walk leading a young boy of about sixteen, and the

^ 174

boy carried a little baby, wrapped in a piece of gray
blanket.

The policeman was saying, “I don’t care if I can't
understand you. You can’t sit in the gutter all day.
We’ll find out about you.”

And the boy, in Spanish, with a peculiar inflection

said,

“But senor,

I

do nothing wrong. Why do you

take me away?”

The policeman saw Jesus Maria. “Hey paisano,” he
called. “What’s this cholo talking about?”

Jesus Maria stepped out and addressed the boy. “Can
I

be of service to you?”

The boy broke into a relieved flood. “I came ha:ie

^ 175 ^

to work. Some Mexican men said there would be work
bare, and there was none. I was sitting down resting

when this man came to me and dragged me away.”
Jesus Maria nodded and turned back to the police-

man. “Has he done some crime, this little one?”
“No, but he’s been sitting in the gutter on Alvarado
Street for about three hours.”

“He is a friend of mine,” Jesus Maria said. “I will
take care of him.”

"Well, keep him out of the gutter.”
Jesus Maria and his new friend walked up the hill.
“I will take you to the house where I live. There you
will have something to eat.

What baby is this?”

“It is my baby," said the boy. “I

am a capordl, and

he is my baby. He is sick now; but when he grows
up, he is going to be a general.”

“What is he sick from, Senor Caporil?”
“I don’t know.
baby’s face,

The

He is just sick.” He showed the

and it looked very ill indeed.

sympathies of Jesus Maria moimted.

“The

house where I live is owned by my friend Danny, and
there is a good man, Senor Capordl.

There is one to

appeal to when trouble is upon one. Look, we will go

^ 176

tfiere,

and that Danny will give us shelter. My friend

Mrs. Palochico has a goat. We will borrow a little milk
for the baby.”

The corporal’s face for the first time wore a smile
of comfort. “It is good to have friends,” he said. "In

Torredn I have many friends who would make themselves beggars to help me.”

He boasted a little to Jesus

Maria. “I have rich friends, but of course they do not

know my need.”
Pilon pushed open the gate of Danny’s yard, and
they entered together. Danny and Pablo and Big Joe

were sitting in the living room, waiting tor the daily
miracle of food. Jesus Maria pushed the boy into the

room.

"Here is a young soldier, a capoi41,” he explained.

"He has a baby here with him, and that baby is sick.”

The friends arose with alacrity. The corporal threw
back the gray blanket from the baby’s face.

"He is sick, all right.” Danny said. “Maybe we should
get a doctor.”

But the soldier shook his head. “No doctors.

I

do

not like doctors. This baby does not cry, and he will

^ 177 {3

not eat much. Maybe when he rests, then he will be
well again.”

At
child.

this

moment Pilon entered and

inspected the

“This baby is sick,” he said.

Pilon immediately took control Jesus Maria he sent
to Mrs. Palochico’s house to

borrow goat milk; Big

Joe and Pablo to get an apple box, pad it with dry
grass and line it with a sheepskin coat

his bed,

Danny offered

but it was refused. The corporal stood in the

living room

and smiled gently on these good people.

At last the baby lay

m

its box,

but its eyes were listless

and It refused the milk.

The Pirate came in, bearing a bag of mackerels.
The friends cooked the fish and had their dinner. The
baby would not even eat mackerel. Every now and
tlien

one of the friends jumped up and ran to look

at the baby. When supper was over, they sat about the

stove

and prepared for a quiet evening.

The corporal had been silent, had given no account
of himself. The friends were a little hurt at this, but

they knew he would tell them in time. Pilon, to whom

knowledge was as gold to be mined, made a few ten«
tative drills into the corporal’s reticence.

"It is not often that

one sees a young soldier with

a baby,” he suggested delicately.

The corporal grinned with pride.
Pablo added, “This baby was probably found in the

garden of love. And that is the best kind of babies,
for only good things are in it.”

“We too have been soldiers,” said Danny. “When
we die, we will go to the grave on a gun carriage, and
a firing squad will shoot over us.”

They waited to see whether the corporal would improve upon the opportunity they had offered. The corporal looked his appreciation. “You have been good to

me,” he said. “You have been as good and kind as my
friends in

Torredn would be. This is my baby, the

baby of my wife.”

“And where is your wife?” Pilon asked.

The corporal lost his smile. “She is in Mexico,” he
said. Then he grew vivacious again. “I met a man,
and he told me a curious thing. He said we can make
of babies what we will. He said, ‘You tell the baby
often what you want him to do, and

when he grows

up he will do that.’ Over and over I tell this baby, ‘You
will be a general.’ Do you think it will be so?”

^ 179 ^

The friends nodded politely. “It may be,” said Pilon
‘T have not heard of this practice.”

you will be a

“I say twenty times a day, ‘Manuel,

general some day. You will have big epaulets and a
sash. Your sword will be gold. You will ride a palamino

horse.

What a life for you, Manuel!’ The man said

he surely will be a general if I say it so.”

Danny got up and went to the apple box. “You
will

be a generdi,” he said to the baby.

“When you

grow up you will be a great generdl.”

The others trooped over to see whether the formula
had had any effect.

The Pirate whispered, ‘You will be a generdi,” and
he wondered whether the same method would work

on a dog.
“This baby is sick all right,” Danny said. “We must

keep him warm.”

They went back to their seats.
‘Tour wife is in Mexico—” Pilon suggested.

The corporal wrinkled his brows and thought for a
while, and then he smiled brilliantly. “I will tell you.
It is not a thing to tell to strangers,

but you are my

Mends. I was a soldier in Chihuahua, and I was dili180

gent and clean and I^ept oil in

my rifle, so that 1

became a capordl. And then I was married to a beautiful girl. I

do not say that it was not because of the

chevrons that she married me. But she was very beautiful

and young. Her eyes were bright, she had good

white teeth and her hair was long and shining. So
pretty soon this baby was bom.”

“That is good,” said Danny. “I should like to be
you. There is nothing so good as a baby.”
"Yes,” said the corporal, “I was glad. And we went

in to the baptism, and I wore a sash, although the book
of the army did not mention it.

And when we came

out of that church, a capitin with epaulets and a sa^

and a silver sword saw my wife. Pretty soon my wife
went away. Then I went to that capitdn and I said,
'Give me back my wife,’ and he said, ‘You do not value

your life, to

talk this

way to your superior.’ ” The

corporal spread his hands and lifted his shoulders in a
gesture of caged resignation.

“Oh, that thiefi” cried Jesus Maria.

“You gathered your friends. You killed that capitdn,”
Pablo anticipated.

The corporal looked self<onscious. “No. There wa*

^

i8i

^

The first night, some one shot at me
through the window. The second day a field gun went
nothing to do.

off by mistake and it came so close to

me that the wind

knocked me down. So, I went away from there, and I
took the baby with me.”

There was fierceness in the faces of the friends, and
their eyes were dangerous.

The Pirate, in his comer,

snarled, and all the dogs growled.

“We should have been there,” Pilon cried. “We
would have made that capitdn wish he had never lived.

My grandfather suffered at the hands of a priest, and
he tied that priest naked to a post in a corral and
turned a little calf in witli him. Oh, there are ways.”
“I was only a capordl,” said the boy. “I had to run

away.” Tears of shame were in his eyes. “There is no
help for a capordl when a capitdn is against him; so I

ran away, with the baby Manuel. In Fresno I met this
wise man, and he told

me I could make Manuel be

what I wished. I tell that baby twenty times every day,
‘You will be a general. You will wear epaulets and carry
”
a golden sword.’

Here was drama that made the experiments of Cornelia

Ruhr seem uninteresting and vain. Here was a

^ 182 ^

situation

which demanded the action of the friends.

But its scene was so remote that action was impossible.

They looked in admiration at the corporal. He was so
young to have had such an adventure!
“I wish,”

Danny said wickedly, “that we were in

Torredn now. Pilon would make a plan for us. It is too

bad we cannot go there.”
Big Joe Portagee had stayed awake, a tribute to the
fascination of the corporal’s story. He went to the apple

hox and looked in. “You going to be a general,” he said.

And then, “Look! This baby is moving funny.” The
friends crowded around. The spasm had already started.

The little feet kicked down and then drew up. The
hands clawed about helplessly, and then the baby scrabbled and shuddered.

“A doctor,” Danny cried. "We must have a doctor.”
But he and every one knew if was no use. Approaching
death wears a cloak no one ever mistakes. While they

watched, the baby stiffened and the struggle ended. The

mouth dropped open, and the baby was dead. In kindness,

Danny covered the apple box with a piece of

blanket.

The corporal stood very straight and stared

^ 183 ^

before him, so shocked that he could not speak nor
think.

Jesus Maria laid a hand on his shoulder and led him
to a chair. “You are so young,” he said. “You will have

many more babies.”

The corporal moaned, “Now he is dead. Now he will
never be a general with that sash and that sword.”

There were tears in the eyes of the friends. In the
corner,

all

the dogs whined miserably.

The

Pirate

buried his big head in the fur of Senor Alec Thompson,

In a soft tone, almost a benediction, Pilon said, “Now

you yourself must kill the capitSn. We honor you for
a noble plan of revenge; but that is over and you must
take your own vengeance, and we will help you, if we
can.

The corporal turned dulled eyes to him. “Revenge?”
he asked. "Kill tlie capitan? What do you mean?”
“Why, it was plain what your plan was,” Pilon said.
"This baby would grow up, and he would be a general;

and in time he would find that capitdn, and he would
kill him slowly. It was a good plan.

The long waiting,

and then the stroke. We, your friends, honor you for it.”

The corporal was looking bewilderedly at

^ 184 ^

Pilon.

“What is this?” he demanded. “I have nothing to do
with this capitdn.

He is the capitin.”

The friends sat forward.
Pilon cried, “Then what was this plan to make the

baby be a general? Why was that?”

The corporal was a little embarrassed then. “It is
the duty of a father to do well by his child. I wanted

Manuel to have more good things than I had.”
“Is that all?”

Danny cried.

“Well,” said the corporal,

“my wife was so pretty,

and she was not any puta, either. She was a good woman,
and that capitdn took her. He had little epaulets, and
a little sash, and his sword was only of a silver color.
Consider,” said the corporal; and he spread out his
hands, “if that capitdn, with tlie little epaulets and the
little

sash could take my wife, imagine what a generdl

with a big sash and a gold sword could takel”

There was a long silence while Danny and Pilon and
Pablo and Jesus Maria and the Pirate and Big Joe
Portagee digested the principle. And when it was digested, they waited for Danny to speak.

“It is to be pitied,” said Danny at last, “that so few

parents have the well-being of their children at heart

^ 185 ^

Now we are more sorry than ever that the baby is gone^
for with such a father, what a happy life he has missed.”

All of the friends nodded solemnly.

"What will you do now?” asked Jesus Maria, the dis.
coverer.

"I will go hack to Mexico,” said the corporal. “I am

a soldier in my heart. It may be, if I keep oiling my
rifle,

I myself

may be an officer some day. Who can

tell?”

The six friends looked at him admiringly. They were
proud to have known such a man.

^ i86 jg

XI
How, under the most adverse circumstances, love
came to Big Joe Portagee.

For Big Joe
feel love was to do something about

it.

Portagee, to

And this is the

history of one of his love affairs.
It had been raining in Monterey;

from the tall pines

the water dripped all day. The paisanos of Tortilla Flat

did not come out of their houses, but from every chim-

ney a blue column of pine wood smoke drifted so that
the air smelled clean and fresh and perfumed.

At five o’clock in the afternoon, the rain stopped for a
few moments and Big Joe Portagee, who had been tmder a rowboat on the beach most of the day, came out

and started up the hill toward Danny’s house. He was
cold and hungry.

When he came to the very edge of Tortilla Flat, the

^ 187

skies opened and the rain poured down.

Big Joe was soaked through.

In an instant

He ran into the nearest

house to get out of the rain, and that house was inhabited by Tia Ignacia.

The lady was about forty-five, a widow of long standing and some success. Ordinarily she was taciturn and
harsh, for there was in her veins

more Indian blood

than is considered decent in Tortilla Flat.

When Big Joe entered, she had just opened a gallon
'

of red wine and was preparing to pour out a glass for
her stomach’s sake. Her attempt to push the jug under

a chair was unsuccessful. Big Joe stood in her doorway

dripping water on the floor.

“Come in and get dry,” said Tia Ignacia. Big Joe,
watching the bottle as a terrier watches a bug, entered
the room.

The rain roared down on the roof. Tia

Ignacia poked up a blaze in her air-tight stove.

“Would you care for a glass of wine?”
“Yes,” said Big Joe. Before he had finished his first
glass,

jug.

Big Joe’s eyes had refastened themselves on the

He drank three glasses before he consented to say

» word, and before the wolfishness went out of his eyes.

Tia Ignacia had given her new jug of wine up for

^ 188 ^

lost.

She drank with him as the only means to preseirc

a little of it to her own use. It was only when the fourth
glass of wine

was in his hand that Big Joe relaxed and

began to enjoy himself.
*'This is not Torrelli’s wine/' he said.
'*No, I get it from an Italian lady who is

my friend/''

She poured out another glass.

The early evening came. Tia Ignacia lighted a kerosene lamp and put some wood in the fire. As long as the

wine must go, it must go, she thought. Her eyes dwelt

on the huge frame of Big Joe Portagee with critical
appraisal.

A little flush warmed her chest.

*‘You have been wwking out in the rain, poor man/’

she said. ‘‘Here, take off your coat and let it dry."

Big Joe rarely told a

lie.

His mind didn’t work

^ 189 ^

quickly enough. “I been on the beach under a rowboat, asleep,” he said.

“But you are all wet, poor fellow.” She inspected him
for some response to her kindness, but on Big Joe’s face

nothing showed except gratification at being out of the
rain and drinking wine. He put out his glass to be filled
again. Having eaten nothing all day, the wine was hav-

ing a profound effect on him.

Tia Ignacia addressed herself anew to the problem.
“It is not good to sit in a wet coat. You will be ill with
cold. Come, let me help you to take off your coat.”

Big Joe wedged himself comfortably into his chair.

“Fm all right,” he said stubbornly.
Tia Ignacia poured herself another glass. The fire

made a rushing sound to counteract with comfort the

drumming of water on the roof.
Big Joe made absolutely no move to be friendly, to
be gallant, even to recognize the presence of his hostess.

He drank his wine in big swallows. He smiled stupidly
at the stove. He rocked himself a little in the chair.
Anger and despair arose in Tia Ignacia. “This pig,”
die thought, “this big and dirty animal. It would be
better for me if I brought some cow in the house out

^ 190 ^

of the ram. Another man would say some little friendly
w^ord, at least.”

Big Joe stuck out his glass to be hlled again.

Now Tia Ignacia strove heroically. “In a little warm
house there

is

happiness on such a night,” she said,

“xvhen the rain is dripping and the stove bums sweetly,

then is a time for people to feel friendly. Don’t you feel
friendly?”

“Sure,” said Big Joe.

“Perhaps the light is too bright in your eyes,” she
said coyly. “Would you like me to blow out the light?”
“It don’t bother

me none,” said Big Joe, “if you want

to save oil, go ahead.”

She blew down the lamp chimney, and the room
leaped to darkness. Then she went back to her chair

and waited for his gallantry to awaken. She could hear
the gentle rocking of his chair.

A little light came from

the cracks of the stove and struck the shiny comers of

the furniture.

The room was nearly luminous with

warmth. Tia Ignacia heard his chair stop rocking and
braced herself to repel him. Nothing happened.

“To tliink,” she said, “you might be out in this storm,
shivering in a shed or lying on the cold sand under a

^ 191 ^

boat. But no;

you are sitting in a good chair, drinking

good wine, in the company of a lady who

is

your

friend.”

There was no anwer ijrom Big Joe. She could neither
hear him nor see him. Tia Ignacia drank o£E her glass.

She threw virtue to the winds.

“My friend Cornelia

Ruiz has told me that some of her best friends came to
her out of the rain and cold. She comforted them, and
they were her good friends.”

The sound of a little crash came from the direction of
Big Joe. She knew he had dropped his glass, but no

movement followed the crash. “Perhaps he is ill,” she
thought.

“Maybe he has

fainted.”

She jumped up,

lighted a match and set it to the lamp wick. And then

she turned to her guest.

Big Joe was mountainously asleep. His feet stuck out

ahead of him. His head was back and his mouth wide
open. While she looked, amazed and shocked, a

tre-

mendous rattling snore came from his mouth. Big Joe
simply could not be warm and comfortable without going to sleep.
It was a

moment before Tia Ignacia could move all

her crowding emotions into line. She inherited a great

^ 192 ^

deal of Indian blood. She did not cry out. No, shivering

with rage although she was, she walked to her wood
basket, picked out a likely stick, weighed it, put it down

and picked out another one. And then she turned slowly

on Big Joe Portagee. The first blow caught him on the
shoulder and knocked him out of the chair.
“Pig!” Tia Ignacia screamed. “Big dirty garbage!

Out in the mud with you!”
Joe rolled over on the floor. The next blow made a

muddy identation on the seat of his pants. Big Joe was
waking up rapidly now.

“Huh?” he said. “What’s the matter? What you doing?”
“I’ll

show you,” she screamed. She flung open her

door and ran back to him. Big Joe staggered to his feet

under the beating. The stick hammered at his back and
shoulders and head. He ran out of the door, protecting
his head with his hands.

“Don’t,” he pleaded. “Now don’t do that. What’s the

matter?”

The fury followed him like a hornet, down the
garden path and into the muddy street. Her rage was

terrible. She followed him along the street, still beating

him.

“Hey,” he cried. “Now don’t.” He grabbed her and
held her while her arms struggled violently to be free
to continue the beating.

“Oh. great garbage pigl" she cried. “Oh, cowl”

He could not let her go without more beating, so he
held her tightly; and as he stood there, love came to Big

Joe Portagee. It sang in his head; it roared through his

body like a great freshet;

it

shook him as a tropical

stocm shakes a forest of palms. He held her tightly for

a moment, until her anger relaxed.
In the night, in Monterey, a policeman patrols the
streets on a motorcycle to see that good things come to

^ 194 0

no evil. Jake Lake rode about now, his slicker shining
dully, like basalt.

He was unhappy and uncomfort-

able. It was not so bad on the paved streets, but part of

mud paths of Tortilla Fla,t,
and there the yellow mud splashed nastily. His little

his route lay through the

light flashed about. The motor coughed with effort.

All of a sudden Jake Lake cried out in astonishment

and stopped his motor. "What the devil! Say, what the
hell is this?”

Big Joe twisted his neck. “Oh, is that you, Jake? Say,
Jake, as long as you’re going to take us to jail anyway,
can’t you just wait a minute?”

The policeman turned his motor around. “You get
out of the street,” he said. “Somebody’ll come along and

run over you.”
His motor roared in the mud, and the flicker of his
little

headlight disappeared around the comer.

The

rain pattered gently among the trees of Tortilla Flat

^ 195 ^

XII
How Danny’s Friends assisted the Pirate to keep a
vow, and how as a reward for merit the Pirate’s
dogs saw an holy vision.

Every afternoon the Pirate
pushed his empty wheelbarrow up the hill and into
Danny’s yard. He leaned it against the fence and covered it with a sack; then he buried his ax in the ground,
for, as every one knows, it makes steel

much harder to

be buried. Last, he went into the house, reached into a
Bull Durham bag which hung around his neck on a
string, took out the day’s quarter dollar and gave it to

Danny. Then Danny and the Pirate and any other of
the friends

who happened to be in the house went

solemnly into the bedroom, stepping over the bedding
that littered the floor. While the paisanos looked on,

Danny reached under his pillow, brought out the can-

^ 197 £5

vas

bag and deposited the new quarter. This practice

had continued for a long time.

The bag of money had became the symbolic center
of the friendship, the point of trust about which the
fraternity revolved.

They were proud of the money,

proud that they tiad never tampered with it. About the
guardianship of the Pirate’s money there had grown a
structure of self-respect and not a little complacency. It
is a fine thing for a

man to be trusted. This money had

long ceased, in the minds of the friends, to be currency.
It is true that for a time they had dreamed of how

much

wine it would buy, but after a while they lost the conception of it as legal tender. The hoard was aimed at a

gold candlestick, and this potential candlestick was the
property of San Francisco de Assisi. It is far worse to de-

fraud a saint than it is to take liberties with the law.

One evening, by that quick and accurate telegraph
no one understands, news came in that a coast guard
cutter

had gone on the rocks near Carmel. Big Joe

Portagee was away on business of his own, but Danny

and Pablo and Pilon and Jesus Maria and the Pirate
and his dogs joyfully started over the ridge; for if there
was anything they loved,

it

^ 198

was to pick up useable

articles on

the beach. This they thought the most ex-

citing thing in the world. Although they arrived a little
late,

they made up for lost time. All night the Mends

scurried about the beach, and they accumulated a good
pile of flotsam, a five-pound can of butter, several cases

of canned goods, a water-soaked Bowditch, two pea
jackets, a water barrel from a life boat and a machine

gun. When daylight came, they had a goodly pile under
guard.

They accepted a lump sum of five dollars for the lot
from one of the spectators, for it was out of the question
to carry all those heavy things over six miles of steep
hillside to Tortilla Flat.

Because he had not cut his day’s wood, the Pirate received a quarter from Danny, and he put it in his Bull

Durham bag. Then they started tiredly, but with a
warm and expectant happiness, straight over the hills
to Monterey.
It

was afternoon when they got back to Danny’s

house.

The

Pirate

ritualistically

and gave the quarter

to

opened

his

bag

Danny. The whole squad

trooped into the other room. Darmy reached under the

pillow—and his hand came out empty. He threw the

^ 199

pillow back, threw the mattress back,

and then he

turned slowly to his friends, and his eyes had become as
fierce as

a tiger’s eyes. He looked from face to face,

and on every one saw horror and indignation that could
not be simulated.

“Well,” he said, “-well.” The Pirate began to cry.

Danny put his arm around his shoulder. “Do not cry,
little

friend,” he said ominously. “Thou wilt have thy

money again.”

The paisanos went silently out of the room. Danny
walked out into the yard and found a heavy pine stick
three feet long,

and swung it experimentally. Pablo

went into the kitchen and returned bearing an ancient
can-opener with a vicious blade. Jesus Maria from under the house pulled out a broken pick handle.

The

Pirate watched them bewilderedly. They all came back
to the house and sat quietly down.

The Pirate aimed down the hill with his thumb.
“Him?” he asked.

Danny nodded slowly. His

eyes

were veiled and

deadly. His chin stuck out, and, as he sat in the chair,
his whole body weaved a little, like a rattlesnake aiming

to strike.

^ 200 g

Tne Pirate went into the yard and dug up his ax.
For a long time they sat in the house. No words were
spoken, but a wave of cold fury washed and crouched
in the room. The feeling in the house was the feeling

of a rock when the fuse is burning in toward the dynamite.

The afternoon waned; the sun went behind the hill.
The whole of Tortilla Flat seemed hushed and expectant.

They heard his footsteps on the street and their hands
tightened on their sticks. Joe Portagee walked uncertainly up on the porch and in at the front door.

He

had a gallon of wine in his hand. His eyes went uneasily
from face to face, but tlie friends sat still and did not
look directly at him.
“Hello,” said Big Joe.
“Hello,” said Danny.
lazily.

He stood up and stretched

He did not look at Big Joe; he did not walk

directly toward him, but at an angle, as though to pass

him. When he was abreast, he struck with the speed of

a striking snake. Fair on the back of Big Joe’s head the
stick crashed, and Big Joe went down, completely out-

Danny thoughtfully took a string of rawhide from

^ 801 ^

his pocket

and tied the Portagee’s thumbs together.

“Now water,” he said.
Pablo threw a bucket o£ water in Big Joe’s face. He
turned his head and stretched his neck like a chicken,

and then he opened his eyes and looked dazedly at his
friends.

They did not speak to him at all. Danny

measured his distance carefully, like a golfer addressing the ball. His stick smashed on Big Joe’s shoulder;

then the friends went about the business in a cold and
methodical manner. Jesus Maria took the legs, Danny
the shoulders and chest. Big Joe howled and rolled on

the floor. They covered his body from the neck down.

Each blow found a new space and welted it. The shrieks
were deafening. The Pirate stood helplessly by, holding
his ax.

At last, when the whole front of the body was one
bruise, they stopped. Pablo knelt at Big Joe’s head with

his can-opener, Pilon took off the Portagee’s shoes and

picked up his stick again.

Then Big Joe squalled with fear. “It’s buried out by
the front gate,” he cried. "For the love of Christ don’t
kill me!”

Danny and Pilon went out the front door and in a

Eew minutes they came back, carrying the canvas bag.

‘‘How much did you take out?” Danny asked. There
was no inflection in his voice at all.

“Only four. Honest to God. I only took four, and I’ll
work and put them back.”

Danny leaned down, took him by the shoulder and
rolled him over on his face. Then the friends went over

The cries grew
weaker, but the work only stopped when Big Joe was
beaten into unconsciousness. Then Pilon tore off the
bis back with the same deadly precision.

blue shirt and exposed the pulpy raw back. With the

an-opener he cross-hatched the skin so deftly that a
little

blood ran from each line. Pablo brought the salt

to him

back.

and helped him to rub it in all over the tom

At last Danny threw a blanket over the uncon-

scious man.

“I think he will be honest now,” said Danny.

“We should count the money,” Pilon observed. “We
have not counted it for a long time.” They opened. Big
Joe’s gallon of wine and poured the fruit jars full, for

they were tired from their work,

and their emotions

were exhausted.

Then they counted the quarters out in pil« of ten,

^ 203 {3

and excitedly counted again.

“Pirate,”

“there are seven over a thousand!

Danny cried,

Thy time is done!

The day is come for thee to buy thy candlestick for San
Francisco!”

The day had been too full for the Pirate. He went
into the comer with his dogs, and he put his head down
on Fluff and burst into hysterical sobs. The dogs moved
uneasily about, and they licked his ears and pushed at
his

head with their noses; but Fluff, sensible of the

honor of being chosen, lay quietly and nuzzled the thick
hair on the Pirate’s neck.

Danny put all the money back in the bag, and the
bag under his pillow again.

Now Big Joe came to and groaned, for the salt was
working into his back. The paisanos paid no attention
to

him until at last Jesus Maria, that prey to the

humanities, untied Big Joe’s thumbs and gave him a
jar of wine. “Even the enemies of our Saviour gave him

a little comfort,” he excused himself.

That action broke up the punishment. The friends
gathered tenderly about Big Joe. 'They laid him on

Danny’s bed and washed the salt out of his wounds.

They put cold cloths on his head and kept his jar fulf

^ 204 ^

of wine. Big Joe moaned whenever they touched him.

His morals were probably untouched, but it would have

been safe to prophesy that never again would he steal

from the paisanos of Danny’s house.

The Pirate’s hysteria was over. He drank his wine
and his face shone with pleasure while he listened to

Danny make plans for him.
“If we take all this money into town, to the bank,

they will think we have stolen it from a slot machine.

We must take this money to Father Ramon and tell him
about it. Then he will buy the gold candlestick, and he
will bless

it,

and the Pirate will go into the church.

Maybe Father Ramon will say a word about him on
Sunday. The Pirate must be there to hear.”
Pilon looked distastefully at the Pirate’s dirty, ra^ed
clothes. “To-morrow,” he said sternly,

"you must take

the seven extra two-bitses and buy some decent clothes.

For ordinary times these may be all right, but on such

an occasion as this you cannot go into the church looking like such a gutter rat. It will not be a compliment to

your friends.”

The Pirate beamed at him. “To-morrow I will do it,”
he promised.

^ 205 ^

The next morning, true to his promise, he went down
to Monterey. He shopped carefully, and bargained with

an astuteness that seemed to belie the fact that he had
bought nothing in over two years. He came back to
Danny’s house in triumph, bearing a huge silk handkerchief in purple and green and also a broad belt

studded profusely with colored glass jewels. His friends

admired his purchases.

“But what are you going to wear?” Danny asked
despairingly.

“Two toes are out of your shoes where

you cut holes to ease your bunions. You have only
ragged overalls and no hat.”

"We will have to lend him clothes,” said Jesus Maria.
“1 have a coat and vest. Pilon has his father’s good hat

You, Danny, have a shirt and Big Joe has those fine blue
pants.”

“But then we can’t go,” Pilon protested.
“It is not our candlestick,” said Jesus Maria. “Father

Ramon is not likely to say anything nice about us.”
That afternoon they convoyed the treasure to the
priest’s house.

He listened to the story of the sick dog,

and his eyes softened, “—and then. Father,” said the
fixate, “there was that good little dog, and his nose was

^ 206 ^

dry, and his eyes were like tiie glass o£ bottles out of the
sea, and he groaned because he hurt inside.

And then.

Father, I promised the gold candlestick of one thousand

days to San Francisco. He is really my patron. Father.

And then there was a miraclel For that dog wagged his
tail three times,

It

and right away he started to get welL

was a miracle from San Francisco, Father, wasn’t

it?”

The priest nodded his head gravely. “Yes,” he said“It was a miracle sent by our good Saint Francis. I will

buy the candlestick for thee.”

The Pirate was very glad, for it is no little thing to
have one’s prayer answered with a true miracle. If it
were noised about, the Pirate would have a higher station on Tortilla Flat. Already his friends looked at him

with a new respect. They thought no more of his intelli-

gence than they had before, but they knew now that his

meager wits were supplemented with aU the power of

Heaven and all the strength of the saints.

They walked back up to Danny's house, and the dogs
walked behind them. The Pirate felt that he had been

washed in a golden fluid of beatitude. Little chills and
fevers of pleasure chased one another through his body.

^ 807

The paisaBos were glad they had guarded his money,
for even they took a little holiness from the act. Pilon

was relieved that he had not stolen the money in the first
place.
if he

What terrible things might not have happened

had taken the two-bitses belonging to a saint! All

of the friends were as subdued as though they were in

church.

The five dollars from the salvage had lain like fire
in Danny’s pocket, but now he knew what to do with
it.

He and Pilon went to the market and bought seven

pounds of hamburger and a bag of onions and bread

and a big paper of candy. Pablo and Jesus Maria went
to Torrelli’s for two gallons of wine, and not a drop did

they drink on the way home, either.

That night when the fire was lighted and two candles
burned on the table, the friends feasted themselves to
repletion. It was a party in the Pirate’s honor.

He be-

haved himself with a great deal of dignity. He smiled

and smiled when he should have been grave, though.
But he couldn’t help that.
After they had eaten enormously, they sat back and

sipped wine out of the fruit jars.
they called the Pirate.

^ 208

“Our little friend,”

”

Jesus Maria asked, “How did you feel when it hap

pened? When you promised the candlestipk and the dog

began to get well, how did you feel? Did you see any
holy vision?”

The Pirate tried to remember. “I don’t think so—
Maybe I saw a little vision—maybe I saw San Francisco
in the air and he was shining like the sun

—

"Wouldn’t you remember that?” Pilon demanded.

“Yes— I think

I

remember—San

Francisco

looked

on me—and he smiled, like the good saint he is. Then
I

knew the miracle was done. He said, ‘Be good to little

doggies, you dirty man.’

”

“He called you that?”
“Well, I was, and he is not a saint to be telling lies.”
“I don’t think you remember that at all,” said Pablo.

“Well—maybe not, I think I do, though,” The Pirate
was drunk with happiness from the honor and the attention.

“My grandmother saw the Holy Virgin,” said Jesus
Maria. "She was sick to death, and I myself heard her
cry out. She said, ‘Ohee. I see the Mother of God. Ohee.

My dear Mary, fuU of grace,’ ”
“It is given to some to see these things,” said Danny.

^ 209 ^

"My
saw

was not a very good man, but he sometimes
bad things. It desaints, and sometimes he saw

when he saw
pended on whether he was good or bad
visions. Pirate?
them. Have you ever seen any other
afraid to see any
“No,” said the Pirate. “I would be
more.”
It was a decorous party for a

long time. The friends

knew that they were not alone this night.
walls and the windows and the roof

Through the

they could feel the

eyes of the holy saints looking down

upon them.

“On Sunday your candlestick will be there, said
will be wearing our
Pilon. “We cannot go, for you
will mention you
clothes. I do not say Father Ramon
about the

by name, but maybe he will say something
what he says.
candlestick. You must try to remember
Pirate, so you can tell us.”

Then Pilon grew stem. “To-day, my little friend,
there were dogs all over Father Ramon s

house. That

was all right for to-day, but you must remember not
fitting
take them to the church on Sunday. It is not
to

that dogs should be in the church.

Leave the dogs at

home.”

The Pirate looked disappointed. “They want to go,”

^ 210 £5

he cried, 'tiow can I leave them? Where can I leave
them?”
Pablo was shocked. “In this afEair so far thou liast
conducted thyself with merit, little Pirate. Right at the
last do you wish to commit sacrilege?”

“No,” said the Pirate humbly.

“Then leave thy dogs here, and we will take care of
them.

It will

be a sacrilege to take them into the

church.”
It was curious how soberly they drank that night. It

was three hours before they sang even an obscene song.

And it was late before their thoughts strayed to light
women. And by the time their minds turned to fighting
they were almost too sleepy to fight. This evening was

a great good marker in their lives.

On Sunday morning the preparation was violent.
They washed the Pirate and inspected his ears and his
nostrils.

Big Joe, wrapped in a blanket, watched the

Pirate put on his blue serge trousers. Pilon brought out
his father’s hat. They persuaded the Pirate not to wear

his jewel-studded belt outside his coat, and showed him

how he could leave his coat open so that the jewels flashed
now and then. TTie item of shoes gave the most trouble.

^ 211 ^

Big Joe had the only shoes big enough for the Pirate,

and his were worse even than the Pirate’s. The difficulty
lay in the holes cut for the comfort of bunions, where

the toes showed through. Pilon solved it finally with a
little soot from the inside of the stove. Well rubbed into

the skin, the soot

made it quite difficult to see the

bunion holes.

At last he was ready; Pilon’s father’s hat rakishly on
his head, Danny’s shirt. Big Joe’s pants, the huge hand-

kerchief around his neck, and at intervals, the flashing

of the jeweled belt. He walked, for the friends to inspect him, and they looked on critically.

“Pick up your feet. Pirate.”

“Don’t drag your heels.”

“Stop picking at your handkerchief.”

“Those people who see you will think you are not in
the habit of good clothes.”

At last the Pirate turned to his friends. "If tliose dogs
could only come with me,” he complained. “I would
tell

them they must not come in the church.”

But the paisanos were firm. “No,” said Danny. “'They
might get in some way. We will keep them here in the
house for you.”

‘"They won't like it,” said the Pirate helplessly. "They
will be lonely, maybe.”

He turned to the dogs in the

comer. “You must stay here,” he said. "It would not be

good for you to go to church. Stay with my friends until
I come back again.”

And then he slipped out and closed

the door behind him. Instantly a wild clamor of bark-

ing and howling broke out in the house. Only his faith
in the judgment of his friends prevented the Pirate’*
relenting.

As he walked down the street, he felt naked and unprotected without his dogs. It was as though one of his
senses were gone. He was frightened to be out alone. Any

one might attack him. But he walked bravely on,
through the town and out to the Church of San Carlos.

Now, before the service began, the swinging doors
were open. The Pirate dipped Holy Water out of the
marble font, crossed himself, genuflected before the Virgin, went into the church, did his duty to the altar and

at down. The long church was rather dark, but the
high altar was on fire with candles. And in front of
the images at the sides, the votive lights were burning.

The old and sweet incense perfumed the church.
For a time the Pirate at looking at the altar, but it

^ 213 ^

think about very mucn, too
was too remote, too holy to
eyes sought someunapproachable by a poor man. His
would not frighten him.
thing warmer, something that
was a
figure of Saint Francis,

And there, in front of the

and in it a tall candle was

beautiful golden candlestick,

burning.

The Pirate sighed with excitement.
people came in, and the swinging
the service began and the

And although the

doors were shut and

Pirate went through the

he could not stop looking at

form,

his saint and at the candle-

He could not believe that he.
searched the face of the
the Pirate, had given it. He

stick. It was so beautiful.

saint to see whether St.

Francis liked the candlestick.

He was sure the image smiled a little
recurring smile of one who

now and then, the

thinks of pleasant things.

At last the sermon began. “There is
the church,” Father Ramon

said.

of the church has given a golden
of Saint Francis.”

a new beauty in

“One of the children

candlestick to the glory

He told the story of the dog, then,

told it rather baldly on purpose.
faces of the parishioners until

His eyes searched the

he saw little smiles appear

be considered funny,
there. “It is not a thing to
said.

“Saint Francis loved the beasts so

^ 214 ^

he

much that he

preached to them.” Then Father Ramon told the story
of the bad wolf of Gubbio and he told of the wild turtle-

doves and of the sister larks. The Pirate looked at him
in wonder as the sermon went on.

Suddenly a rushing sound came from the door. A
furious barking and scratching broke out.

The doors

swung wildly and in rushed Fluff and Rudolph, Enrique, Pajarito and Senor Alec Thompson. They raised
their noses, and then darted in a struggling squad to the
Pirate.

They leaped upon him with little cries and

whinings. They swarmed over him.

The priest stopped talking and looked sternly down
toward the commotion. The Pirate looked back helplessly, in agony. So it was in vain, and the sacrilege was

committed.

Then Father Ramon laughed, and the congregation
laughed.

“Take the dogs outside,” he said. "Let them

wait until we are through.”

The Pirate, with embarrassed, apologetic gestures,
conducted his dogs outside. “It is wrong,” he said to
them. “I am angry with you. Oh, I am ashamed of you.”

The dogs cringed to the ground and whined piteously.
“I know what you did,” said the Pirate, “You bit my

^ 2»5 ^

h lends, you broke a window, and you came. Now stay
here and wait, oh, wicked dogs; oh, dogs of sacrilege.”

He left them stricken with grief and repentance and
went back into the church. The people, still laughing,
turned and looked at him, until he sank into his seat

and tried to efface himself.

“Do not be ashamed,” Father Ramon said. “It is no
sin to be loved by your dogs, and no sin to love them.

See how Saint Francis loved the beasts.” Then he told

more stories of that good saint.

The embarrassment left the Pirate. His lips moved.
"Oh,” he thought, “if the dogs could only hear this.

They would be glad if they could know all this.” When
the sermon was over, his ears still rang with the stories.
Automatically he followed the ritual, but he did not

hear the service. And when it was over, he rushed for
the door. He was first out of the church. The dogs, still
sad and diffident, crowded about him.

“Come,” he cried. “I have some things to tell you.”

He started at a trot up the hill toward the pine forest,
and the dogs galloped and bounced about him.

He

came at last to the shelter of the woods, and still he went
on, until he found a long aisle among the pines, where

^ 2x6

the branches met overhead, where the tree trunks were

near together. For a moment he looked helplessly about.
“I want it to be the way it was,” he said. “If only you

could have been there, and heard the father say it.” He
laid one big stone on top of another. “Now here is the

image,” he told the dogs. He stuck a little stick in the

ground. “Right here is the candlestick, with a candle
in it.”
It was dusky in the glade, and the air was sweet with

pine resin.

The trees whispered softly in the breeze.

The Pirate said with authority, “Now, Enrique, you sit
here. And you, Rudolph, here. I want Fluff here because
he is the littlest. Pajarito, thou great fool, sit here and

make no trouble. Senor Alec Thompson, you may noi
lie down.”

Thus he arranged them in two rows, two in the from
line and three in the back.

"I want to tell you how it was,” he said.

“You are

forgiven for breaking into the church. Father Ramon
said it was no sacrilege this time. Now, attention. I have

things to tell.”

The dogs sat in their places and watched him earnestly. Senor Alec Thompson flapped his tail, until the

^ 217 #

Pirate. turned to him.

“Here is no place for that,” he

said. “Saint Francis would not mind, but I do not like

you to wag your tail while you listen. Now, I am going
to tell you about Saint Francis.”

That day his memory was inspired. The sun found

interstices in the foliage and threw brilliant patterns on

the pine-needle carpet.

The dogs sat patiently, their

eyes on the Pirate’s lips.

He told everything the priest

had told, all the stories, all the observations. Hardly a
word was out of its place.

When he was done, he regarded the dogs solemnly.
"Saint Francis did all that,” he said.

^ 8i8 ^

The trees hushed their whispering. The forest was
silent and enchanted.

Suddenly there was a tiny sound behind the Pirate.
All the dogs looked up. The Pirate was afrsdd to turn
his head.

A long moment passed.

And then the moment was over. The dogs lowered
their eyes. The tree-tops stirred to life again and the
sunlight patterns moved bewilderingly.

The Pirate was so happy that his heart pained him.
"Did you see him?” he cried. “Was it San Francisco?

OhI What good dogs you must be to see a vision.”

The dogs leaped up at his tone. Their mouths opened
and they: tails threshed joyfully.

^ 219 ^

XIII
How Danny’s Friends threw themselves to the aid
of a distressed lady.

ScNoiiA Teresina Cortez

and her eight children and her ancient mother lived
in a pleasant cottage on the edge of the deep gulch that
defines the southern frontier of Tortilla Flat. Teresina

was a good figure of a mature woman, nearing thirty.

Her mother, that ancient, dried, toothless one, relict of
a past generation, was nearly fifty. It was long since any

one had remembered that her name was Angelica.

During the week work was ready to this vieja’s hand,
for it was her duty to feed, punish, cajole, dress and bed

down seven of the eight children. Teresina was busy
with the eighth, and with making certain preparations
for the ninth.

On Sunday, however, the vieja, clad in black satin

^ 821

more ancient even than she, hatted in a grim and durable affair of black straw,

on which were fastened two

true cherries of enameled plaster, threw duty to the

wind and went firmly to church, where she sat as motionless as the saints in their niches.

Once a month, in

the afternoon, she went to confession. It would be interesting to know what sins she confessed,

and where

she found the time to commit them, for in Teresina’a

house there were creepers, crawlers, stumblers, shriekers, cat-killers, fallers-out-of-trees; and each one of these

charges could be trusted to be ravenous every two
hours.
Is it any wonder that the vieja had a remote soul and

nerves of steel? Any other kind would have gone scream-

ing out of her body like little skyrockets.

Teresina was a mildly puzzled woman, as far as her

mind was concerned. Her body was one of those perfect
retorts for the distillation of children.

The first baby,

conceived when she was fourteen, had been a shock to
her; such a shock, that she delivered it in the ball park

at night, wrapped it in newspaper and left

it

night watchman to find. This is a secret.

Even now

for the

Teresina might get into trouble if it were known.

When she was sixteen, Mr, Alfred Cortez married her
and gave her his name and the two foundations of her
family, Alfredo

and Ernie. Mr. Cortez gave her that

name gladly. He was only using it temporarily anyway.
His name, before he came to Monterey and after he left,
was Guggliemo. He went away after Ernie was bom.
Perhaps he foresaw that being married to Teresina was
not going to be a quiet life.
Tlie regularity with which she became a mother

always astonished Teresina. It occurred sometimes that
she could not remember who the father of the impend*

ing baby was; and occasionally she almost grew convinced that no lover was necessary. In the time when
she had been under quarantine as a diphtheria carrier

she conceived just the same. However, xvhen a question

became too complicated for her mind to unravel, she
usually laid that problem in the arms of the Mother of
Jesus, who, she knew, had more knowledge of, interest

in and time for such things than she.

Teresina went often to confession. She was the
despair of Father Ramon. Indeed he had seen that while

her knees, her hands and her lips did penance for an

^ 223 ^

old sin, her modest and provocative eyes, flashing under

drawn lashes, laid the foundations for a new one.
During the time I have been telling this, Teresina’s
ninth child was bom, and for the moment she was unengaged.

The vieja received another charge; Alfredo

entered his third year in the first grade, Ernie his sec-

ond, and Panchito went to school for the first time.

At about this time in California it became the stylish
thing for school nurses to visit the classes and to catechize the children
life.

on intimate details of their home

In the first grade, Alfredo was called to the prin-

cipal’s office, for it was thought that he looked thin.

The visiting nurse, trained in child psychology, said
kindly, “Freddie, do you get enough to eat?’’

“Sure,” said Alfredo.

“Well, now. Tell me what you have for breakfast-"
“Tortillas and beans,” said Alfredo.

The nurse nodded her head dismally to the principal.
“What do you have when you go home for lunch?”
“I don’t go home.”

“Don’t you eat at noon?”
“Sure. I bring some beans wrapped up in a tortilla.”

Actual alarm showed in the nurse’s eyes, but she con-

^ 224 {§

trolled herself.

"At night what do you have to eat?”

“Tortillas and beans.”

Her psychology deserted her. “Do you mean to stand
there

and tell me you eat nothing but tortillas and

beans?”

Alfredo was astonished. “Jesus Christ,” he said, “what

more do you want?”
In due course the school doctor listened to the nurse’s
horrified report.

One day he drove up to Teresina’s

house to look into the matter. As he walked through the
yard the creepers, the crawlers and the stumblers were
shrieking one terrible symphony. The doctor stood in

the open kitchen door. With his own eyes he saw the
vieja go to the stove, dip a great spoon into a kettle and

sow the floor with boiled beans. Instantly the noise
ceased. Creepers, crawlers and stumblers went to work

with silent industry, moving from bean to bean, pausing only to eat them. The vieja went back to her chair
for a few moments of peace. Under the bed, under the
chairs, under the stove the children crawled with the in-

tentness of little bugs. The doctor stayed two hours, for
his scientific interest was piqued.

He went away shaking

ius head.

^ 226 ^

He shook his head incredulously while he made his
report. “I gave them every test I

know of,” he said,

“teeth, skin, blood, skeleton, eyes, co-ordination. Gen-

tlemen, they are living on what constitutes a slow
poison, and they have from birth. Gentlemen, I tell you
I

have never seen healthier children in my life!” His

emotion overcame him. “The little beasts,” he cried. “I
never saw such teeth in my life. I never saw such teeth!”

You will wonder how Teresina procured food for
her family. When the bean threshers have passed, you
will see, where they have stopped, big piles of bean
chaff. If you will spread a blanket on the ground, and,

on a windy afternoon, toss the chaff in the air over the
blanket, you will understand that the threshers are not
infallible.

For an afternoon of work you may collect

twenty or more pounds of beans.

In the autumn the vieja and those children who
could walk went into the fields and winnowed the chaff.

The landowners did not mind, for she did no harm. B
was a bad year when the vieja did not collect three or
four hundred pounds of beans.

When you have four hundred pounds of beans in the
house, you need have no fear of starvation. Other

^ 227 ^

tilings, delicacies

such as sugar, tomatoes, peppers, cof-

or meat

may come sometimes miraculously,

fee,

fish

through the intercession of the Virgin, sometimes

through industry or cleverness; but your beans are there,

and you are safe. Beans are a roof over your stomach.
Beans are a warm cloak against economic cold.

Only one thing could threaten the lives and happiness
of the family of the Senora Teresina Cortez; that was a
failure of the bean crop.

When the beans are ripe, the little bushes are pulled
and gathered into piles, to dry crisp for the threshers.

Then is the time to pray that the rain may hold off.

When the little piles of beans lie in lines, yellow against
the dark fields, you will see the farmers watching the
sky, scoxvling with dread at every cloud that sails over;

for if a rain comes, the bean piles must be turned over

to dry again. And if more rain falls before they are dry,

they must be turned again. If a third shower falls, mil-

dew and rot set in, and the crop is lost.

When the beans were drying, it was the vieja’s custom
to

bum a candle to the Virgin.
In the year of which I speak, the beans were piled

^ 228 ^

and the candle had been burned. At Teresina’s house,
the gunny sacks were laid out in readiness.

The threshing machines were oiled and cleaned

A shower fell.
Extra hands rushed to the fields and turned the sod-

den hummocks of beans. The vieja burned another
candle.

More rain fell.

Then the vieja bought two candles with a little gold
piece she had kept for many years. The field hands
turned over the beans to the sun again; and then came
a downpour of cold streaking rain. Not a bean was harvested in all Monterey County. The soggy lumps were

turned under by the plows.

Oh, then distress entered the house of Sehora Teresina Cortez. The staff of life was broken; the little roof

destroyed. Gone was that eternal verity, beans. At night

the children cried with terror at the approaching starvation. They were not told, but they knew. The vieja sat

in church, as always, but her lips drew back in a sneer

when she looked at the Virgin. “You took my candles,”
she thought. “Ohee, yes. Greedy you are for candles.

Oh, thoughtless one.” And sullenly she transferred her

^ 229 ^

allegiance to Santa Clara. She told Santa Clara of the
injustice that had been done.

She permitted herself a

little malicious thought at the Virgin birth.

“You know,

sometimes Teresina can’t remember either,” she told
Santa Clara viciously.

It

has been said that Jesus Maria Corcoran was a

great-hearted man. He had also that gift some humanitarians possess of being inevitably drawn toward those

spheres where his instinct was needed. How many times

had he not come upon young ladies when they needed
comforting.

Toward any pain or sorrow he was irre-

sistibly drawn.

He had not been to Teresina’s house for

many months. If there is no mystical attraction between
pain and humanitarianism, how did it happen that he

went there to call on the very day when the last of the
old year’s beans was put in the pot?

He sat in Teresina’s kitchen, gently brushing children off bis legs. And he looked at Teresina with polite
and pained eyes while she told of the calamity. He
watched, fascinated, when she turned the last bean sack
inside out to show that not one single bean was left.

He

nodded sympathetically when she pointed out the chil-

^ 230 ^

dren,

soon to be skeletons, so soon to die of

so

starvation.

Then

the vieja told bitterly

how

she

had been

tricked by the Virgin. But upon this point, Jesus Maria

was not sympathetic.

“What do you know, old one?” he said sternly.
“Maybe the Blessed Virgin had business some place
else.”

“But four candles

I

burned,” the vieja insisted

shrilly.

Jesus Maria regarded her coldly. “What are four candles to Her?” he said. “I have seen one church

where

She had hundreds. She is no miser of candles.”

But his mind burned with Teresina’s trouble. That
evening he talked mightily and piteously to the friends
at Danny’s house. Out of his great heart he drew a com-

pelling oratory, a passionate plea for those little chil-

dren w'ho had no beans. And so telling was his speech
that the fire in his heart ignited the hearts of his friends.

They leaped up. Their eyes glowed.

“The children shall not starve,” they cried. “It shall
be our trustl”

"We live in luxury,” Pilon said.

“We shall give of our substance,” Danny agreed.
“And if they needed a house, they could live here.”
“To-morrow we shall start,” Pablo exclaimed. "No

more lazinessl To worki There are things to be donel”
Jesus Maria felt the giatification of a leader with
followers.

Theirs was no idle boast. Fish they collected.

The

vegetable patch of the Hotel Del Monte they raided. It

was a glorious game. Theft robbed of the stigma of
theft,

crime altruistically committed—

What is more

gratifying?

The Pirate raised the price of kindlings to thirty
cents and went to three new restaurants every morning.

Big Joe stole Mrs. Palochico’s goat over -and over again,

and each time it went home.

Now food began to accumulate in the house of Teresina. Boxes of lettuce lay on her porch, spoiled mackerel
filled

the neighborhood with a strong odor.

And still

the flame of charity burned in the friends.
If you could see the complaint book at the Monterey

Police Department, you would notice that during this

time there was a minor crime wave in Monterey. The

238

police car hurried from place to place. Here a chicfeeu

was taken, there a whole patch of pumpkins. Paladini

Company reported the loss of two one-hundred-pound
cases of abalone steaks.

Teresina’s house was growing crowded. The kitchen

was stacked high with food. The back porch overflowed
with vegetables. Odors like those of a packing house

permeated Tortilla Flat. Breathlessly the friends dashed
about at their

larcenies,

and long they talked and

planned with Teresina.

At first Teresina was maddened with joy at so much
food, and her head was turned by the compliment. After

a week of it, she rvas not so sure. The baby was down
with colic, Ernie had some kind of bowel trouble, Alfredo’s free was flushed. The creepers and crawlers cried
all

the time. Teresina was ashamed to tell the friends

what she must tell them. It took her several days to get
her courage up; and during that time there arrived fifty

pounds of celery and a crate of cantaloupes. At last she

had to tell them. The neighbors were beginning to look
at her with lifted brows.

She asked all of Danny’s friends into her kitchen, and

^ 233 {3

then she informed them of the trouble, modestly and
carefully, that their feelmgs might not be hurt.

“Green things and fruit are not good for children,"
she explained. “Milk is constipating to a baby after it
is
'

weaned.” She pointed to the flushed and irritable

children. See, they were all sick. They were not getting

the proper food.

“What is the proper food?” Pilon demanded.
“Beans,” she said. “There you have something to
trust,

something that will not go right through you.”

The friends went silently away. They pretended to
themselves to be disheartened, but they knew that the
first fire of

their enthusiasm had been lacking for sev-

eral days.

At Danny’s house they held a conference.
'This must not be told in some circles, for the charge

might be serious.

Long after midnight, four dark forms who shall be
nameless, moved like shadows through the town. Four
indistinct shapes crept up

on the Western Warehouse

Ckjmpany platform. The watchman said, afterward, that

he heard sounds, investigated and saw nothing.

He

could not say how the thing was done, how a lock was

^ 234 {3

broken and the door forced. Only four men know that
the watchman was sound asleep, and they will never tell

on him.

A little later the four shadows left the warehouse,
and now they were bent under tremendous loads. Pantings and snortings came from the shadows.

At three

o’clock

in

the

morning Teresina was

awakened by hearing her back door open. “Who

is

there?” she cried.

There was no answer, but she heard four great
thumps that shook the house. She lighted a candle and
went to the kitchen in her bare feet. There, against the
wall, stood four one-hundred-pound sacks of pink beans*

Teresina rushed in and awakened the vieja. “A miracle'” she cried. “Come look in the kitchen.”

The vieja regarded with shame the plump full skcks.
“Oh, miserable dirty sinner am I,” she moaned. “Oh,

Holy Mother, look with pity on an old fool. Every

month thou shalt have a candle, as long as I live.”
At Danny’s house, four friends were lying happily in
their blankets. What pillow can one have like a good

conscience? They slept well into the afternoon, for their

work was done.

^ 235 ^

And Teresina discovered, by a method she had found
to be infallible, that she was going to have a baby. As
she poured a quart of the new beans into the kettle, she

wondered idly which one of Danny’s friends was responsible.

^ 236 w

XIV
Of the good life at Danny’s House, of a gift pig, of
the pain of Tall Bob, and of the thwarted love of
the Vtefo Ravanno.

Clocks and watches were
not used by the paisanos of Tortilla Flat. Now and then

one of the friends acquired a watch in some extraor
dinary manner, but he kept it only long enough to trade
it

for something

he really wanted. Watches were in

good repute at Danny’s house, but only as media of
exhange. For practical purposes, there was the great

golden watch of the sun. It was better than a watch, and
safer, for there was no way of diverting it to Torrelli.

In the summer, when the hands of a clock point to
seven, it is a nice time to get up, but in winter the same

time is of no value whatever. How much better is the
sun!

When he clears the pine tops and clings to the

^ 237

front porch, be it summer or winter, that is the sensible

time to get up. That is a time when one’s hands do not
quiver nor one’s belly quake with emptiness.

The Pirate and his dogs slept in the living room, secure and warm in their comer. Pilon and Pablo and
Jesus Maria and Danny and Big Joe Portagee slept in

the bedroom. For all his kindness, his generosity, Danny

never allowed his bed to be occupied by any one but
himself. Big Joe tried it twice, and was smacked across

the soles of the feet with a stick; so that even he learned
the inviolable quality of Danny’s bed.

The friends slept on the floor, and their bedding was
unusual. Pablo had three sheepskins stitched together.
Jesus Maria retired by putting his arms through the
sleeves of one old overcoat,

and his legs through the

sleeves of another. Pilon wrapped himself in a big strip

of carpet. Most of the time Big Joe simply curled up
like a dog, and slept in his clothes. Big Joe, while he

had no ability to keep any possession for very long, had

a well-developed genius

for trading everything that

came into his hands for some little measure of wine.

Thus they slept, noisily sometimes, but always comfortably.

On one cold night. Big Joe tried to borrow

^ 238

a dog for his feet, and got well bitten, for the Pirate’s
dogs were not lendable.

No curtains covered the windows, but a generous
Nature had obscured the glass with cobwebs, with dust

and with the neat marks of raindrops.
“It would be nice to clean that window with soap and

water,” Danny said one time.
Pilon’s

sharp

mind leaped

to the

problem with

energy, but it was too easy for him. It did not require

a decent quota of his powers. “More light would get

“We would not spend so much time out
in tlie air if it were light in here. And at night, when

in,” he said.

the air is poisonous, we have no need for light.”

Danny retired from tire field, for if one little mention
brought such clear and quick refutation of his project,

what crushing logic would insistence bring forth? The

window remained as it was; and as time passed, as fly
after fly went to feed the spider family with his blood

and left his huskish body in the webs against the glass,
as dust adhered to dust, the bedroom took on a pleasant

obscurity which

made it possible to sleep in a dusky

lig^t even at noonday.

'They slept peacefully, the friends; but when the sun

^ 239 ^

struck the window in the morning and, failing to get
in, turned the dust to silver and shone on the iridescence

of the blue-bottle flies, then the friends awakened and
stretched and looked about for their shoes. They knew

the front porch was warm

when the sun was on the

window.

They did not awaken quickly, nor fling about nor
shock their systems with any sudden movement. No,
they arose from slumber as gently as a soap bubble
floats

out from

trudged,

still

its

pipe.

Down into the gulch they

only half awake. Gradually their wills

coagulated. They built a fire and boiled some tea and

drank it from tire fruit jars, and at last they settled in
the sun

on the front porch. The flaming flies made

halos about their heads. Life took shape about them,

the shape of yesterday and of to-morrow.

Discussion began slowly, for each man treasured the
little sleep he still possessed.

after noon, intellectual

From this time until well

comradeship came into being.

Then roofs were lifted, houses peered into, motives
inspected,

adventures

recounted.

Ordinarily

their

thoughts went first to Cornelia Ruiz, for it was a rare

day and night during which Cornelia had not some

^ 240 ^

curious and interesting adventure. And it was an ui>
usual adventure from which no moral lesson could be

drawn.

The sun glistened in the pine needles. The earth
The rose of Castile perfumed

smelled dry and good.
the world with

its

flowers.

This was one of the best

of times for the friends of Danny.
existence was remote.
fellows, judging

The struggle for

They sat in judgment on their

not for morals, but for interest. Any

one having a good thing to tell saved it for recounting
at

tliis

rose

time.

The big brown butterflies came to the

and sat on the

flowers

slowly, as though they

and waved

their wings

pumped honey out by wing

power.
“I saw Albert Rasmussen," said Danny.

"He came

from Cornelia's house. What trouble that Cornelia has.
Every day some trouble.”
“It is her way of life,” said Pablo. "I am not one to
cast stones,

but sometimes I think Cornelia is a little

too

Two things only occur to Cornelia, love

lively.

and fighting.”
“Well,” said Pilon. “What do you want?”

"She never has any peace,” Jesus Maria said sadly.

^ 241 ^

“She doesn’t want any,” said Pilon. “Give peace to
that Cornelia, and she will die. Love and fighting

That

is good, what you said, Pablo. Love and fighting, and

a little wine. Then you are always young, always happy.

What happened to Cornelia yesterday?”
Danny looked in triumph at Pilon, It was an unusual thing for Pilon not to know everything that hap-

pened.

And now Danny could tell by the hurt and

piqued look on Pilon’s face that he did not know this
one.

“All of you know Cornelia,” he began. “Sometimes

men take presents to Cornelia, a chicken or a rabbit or
a cabbage. Just little things, and Cornelia likes those
things. Well, yesterday

Emilio Murietta took to Cor-

nelia a little pig, only so long; a nice little

Emilio found that pig in the gulch.

pink pig.

The sow chased

him when he picked it up, but he ran fast, and he
came to Cornelia’s house with that pig.
“This Emilio is a great talker. He said to Cornelia,
‘There

is

nothing nicer to have than a pig.

He will

eat anything.

He is a nice pet. You get to love that

little pig. But

then that pig grows up and his character

changes. That pig becomes mean and evil-tempered, so

^ 842 ^

that you do not love him any more. Then one day that

pig bites you, and you are angry. And so you kill that
pig and eat him.’

”

The friends nodded gravely, and Pilon said, “In some
ways Emilio is not a dull man. See how many satisfactions he has made with his pig—affection, love, revenge

and food. I must go to talk with Emilio sometime.”
But the friends could see that Pilon was jealous of a
rival logician.

“Go on with this pig,” said Pablo.
“Well,” said Danny, “Cornelia took that little pig,

and she was nice to Emilio. She said that when the
time came, and she was angry at that pig, Emilio could

have some of it to eat. Well, then Emilio w’ent away.
Cornelia

made a little box for that pig to sleep in,

by the stove.

“Some ladies came in to see her, then, and Cornelia
let

them hold the litde pig and pet it. After a while

Sweets Ramirez stepped on that pig’s tail. Oh! It squealed
like a steam whistle.

The front door was open. That

big sow she came in for her little pig again. All the
tables and all the dishes were smashed. All the chairs,

they were broken. And that big sow bit Sweets Ramireac

^ 243 ^

and pulled off Cornelia’s skirt, and then, when those
ladies

were in the kitchen and the door locked, the

sow went away, and that little pig went too. Now Cornelia is furious. She says she will beat Emilio.”

“There it is,” said Pablo. “That is the way life goes,

never the way you planned. It was that way when Tall

Bob Smoke went to kill himself.”

The faces of the friends swung appreciatively toward
Pablo.

“You will know Bob Smoke,” Pablo began. “He looks
the way a vaquero should look, long legs, thin body;

but he cannot ride very well. At the rodeo he is often

^ 244 ^

m the dust. Now this Bob

is

one who wants to be ad-

mired. When there is a parade he likes to carry the
flag.

When there is a fight he wants to be referee. At

the show he is always the first one to say ‘Down in frontl’
Yes, there is a man who wants to be a great man, and

to ha\'e people see him,

and admire him. And some-

thing you do not know, perhaps, he wants people to
love him, too.

“Poor unfortunate one, he

is

a

man bom to be

laughed at. Some people pity him, but most of them
just laugh at him.

And laughter stabs that Tall Bob

Smoke.

“Maybe you remember that time in the parade when
he carried the flag. Very straight Bob sat, on a big white
horse. Right in front of the place where the judges sat»

that big stupid horse fainted from the heat. Bob went
flying right over that horse’s head,

and the flag sailed

through the air like a spear and stuck in the ground,
upside down.

“That is how it is with him. Whenever he tries to
be a great man, something happens and everybody
laughs.

You remember when he was poundmaster he

tried all afternoon to lasso a dog.

^ 245

Everybody in town

came to see. He threw the rope and the dog squatted

down and the rope slipped off and the dog ran away.
Oh, the people laughed. Bob was so ashamed that he
thought,
sad.

‘I

will kill myself,

and then people will be

They will be sorry they laughed.’ And then he

thought, ‘But I will be dead. I will not know how sorry

they are.' So he made this plan,

‘I

will wait until I

hear some one coming to my room. I will point a pistol

my head. Then that friend will argue with me. He
will make me promise not to shoot myself. The people
will be sorry then that they drove me to kill myself.’
at

That is the way he thought it.
“So he walked home to his little house, and every-

body he passed called out, ‘Did you catch the dog.
Bob?’

He was very sad when he got home. He took

a pistol and put cartridges in it, and then he sat down

and waited for some one to come.

“He planned how it would be, and he practiced it
with a

pistol.

The friend would say, ‘Ai, what you

doing? Don’t shoot yourself, poor fellow.’

Then Bob

would say how he didn’t want to live any more because
every one was so mean.

“He thought about it over and over, but no one

^ 246 ^

came. And the next day he waited, and no one came.

But that next night Charlie Meeler came. Bob heard

him on the porch and put the pistol to his head. And
he cocked it to make it look more real. ‘Now he will
argue with me, and I will let him persuade me,’ Bob
thought.

“Charlie Meeler opened the door. He saw Bob hold-

ing that pistol to his head. But he did not shout; no.
Charlie Meeler jumped and grabbed that gun and that

gun went off and shot away the end of Bob’s nose. And
then the people laughed even more. There were pieces
in the paper about it. The whole town laughed.

“You have all seen Bob’s nose, with the end shot

The people laughed; but it was a hard kind of
laughing, and they felt bad to laugh. And ever since

off.

then, they let Tall Bob carry the flag in every parade

there is. And the city bought him a net to catch dogs
with.

“But he is not a happy man, with his nose like that.”
Pablo fell silent and picked up a stick from the porch

and whipped his leg a little.
“I remember his nose, how it was,” said Danny. "He
is

not a bad one. that Bob. The Pirate can tell you,

^ 247 ^

when he gets back. Sometimes the Pirate puts all his
dogs in Bob’s wagon and then the people think

Bob

has caught them, and the people say, ‘There is a pound-

man for you.’ It is not so easy to catch dogs when it
is your

business to catch dogs.”

Jesus Maria had been brooding, with his head back
against the wall. He observed, “It is worse than whip-

ping to be laughed at. Old Tomas, the rag sucker, wa.«
laughed right into his grave. Apd afterwards the people

were sorry they laughed.

“And,” said Jesus Maria, “there is another kind of
laughing, too

That story of Tall Bob is funny; but

when you open your mouth to laugh, something like a
hand squeezes your

heart.

I

know about old Mr.

Ravanno who hanged himself last year. And there is a
funny story too, but it is not pleasant to laugh at.”
“I heard something about it,” said Pilon, “but I do

not know that story.”

“Well,” said Jesus Maria. “I will tell you that story,

and you will see if you can laugh. When I was a little
boy, I played games with Petey Ravanno.
little

A good quick

boy, that Petey, but always in trouble.

He had

two brothers and four sisters, and there was his father,

^ 348 ^

Old Pete. All that family is gone now. One brother is*
in San Quentin, the other was killed by a Japanese gar-

dener for stealing a wagonload of watermelons. And the
girls, well,

you know how girls are; they went away.

Susy is in Old Jenny’s house in Salinas right now.

“So there was only Petey and the old man left. Petey

grew up, and always he was in trouble.

He went to

reform school for a while, and tlien he came back. Every
Saturday he was drunk, and every time he went to jail
until Monday. His father was a kind of a friendly man.

He got drunk every week with Petey. Nearly ahvays
they were in jail together. Old man Ravanno was lonely
when Petey was not there with him. He liked that boy
Petey. Whatever Petey did, that old man did, even
when he was sixty years old.

“Maybe you remember tliat Gracie Montez?” Jesus
Maria asked. “She was not a very good girl. When she
was only twelve years old, the fleet came to Monterey,

and Gracie had her first baby, so young as that She
was pretty, you see, and quick, and her tongue was
sharp. Always she seemed to run away from men, and

men ran fast after her. And sometimes they caught her.
But you could not get close to her. Always that Gracie

^ 249 {§

seemed to have something nice that she did not give
to you,

something in bach of her eyes that said, ‘If I

really wanted to, I would be different to you from any

woman you ever knew.’
“I

know about that,” said Jesus Maria, “for I ran

after Gracie, too. And Petey ran after her. Only Petey

was

different.” Jesus

Maria looked sharply into his

friends’ eyes to emphasize his point.

“Petey wanted what Gracie had so much that he grew
thin, and his eyes were as wide and pained as the eyes

of one who smokes marihuana. Petey could not eat, and

he was sick. Old Man Ravanno went over and talked
to Gracie.

He said, ‘If you are not nice to Petey, he

will die.’

But she only laughed. She was not a very

good one. And then her little sister ’Tonia came into
the room. ’Tonia was fourteen years old. The old man

looked at her and his breath stopped. ’Tonia was like
Gracie, with that funny thing that she kept away from

men. Old Man Ravanno could not help it.

He said,

'Come to me, little girl.’ But ’Tonia was not a little
girl- She knew. So she laughed and ran out of the room.

Man Ravanno went home then. Petey said.
‘Something is the matter with thee, my father.’
“Old

^ 250 ^

"

‘No, Petey,’ the old man said, ‘only I worry that

you do not get this Grade, so you can be well again.'

“Hot blooded, all those Ravannos were!

“And then what do you think?” Jesus Maria continued. “Petey went to cut squids for

Chin Kee, and

he made presents to Gracie, big bottles of Agua Florida

and ribbons and garters. He paid to have her picture
taken, with colors on the picture, too.

“Gracie took all the presents and she ran away from

him, and laughed.

You should have heard how she

laughed. It made you .want to choke her and pet her
at the same time. It

made you want to cut her open

and get that thing that was inside of her. I know how
it

was. I ran after her, and Petey told me, too. But it

made Petey crazy. He could not sleep any more. He said
to me,

‘If

that Gracie will

marry me in the church,

then she will not dare to run away any more, because
she will be married, and it will be a sin to run away.’

So he asked her. She laughed that high laugh that made

you want to choke her.
“Oh! Petey was crazy. He went home and put a rope
over a rafter and he stood on a box and put the rope

around his neck and then he kicked out the box. Well,

^ 251 ^

Petey’s father came in then. He cut the rope and called

the doctor. But it was two hours before Petey opened
his eyes, and it was four days before he could talk.”

Jesus Maria paused.

He saw with

pride that his

friends were leaning in toward the story.

“That was

the way of it,” he said.

“But Gracie Montez married that Petey Ravanno,”
Pilon cried excitedly “I know her. She is a good woman.

She never misses mass, and she goes once a month to
confession.”

“So it is now,” Jesus Maria agreed. “Old man Ra-

vanno was angry. He ran to Gracie's house, and he
cried, ‘See how you murder
ness.

my boy with your foolish-

He tried to kill himself for you,

dung-heap

chicken.’

“Gracie was afraid, but she was pleased, too, because
it is

not many women who can make a man go so far.

She went to see Petey where he was in bed with a
crooked neck. After a little while they were married.
“It turned out the way Petey thought it would, too.

When the church told her to be a good wife, she was
a good wife. She didn’t laugh to men any more. And
she didn’t run away so they chased her. Petey went on

cutting squids, and pretty soon Chin Kee let him empty

the squid boxes.

And not long after that he was the

mayordomo of the squid yard. You see,”

said Jesus

Maria, “there is a good story. It would be a story for

a priest to tell, if it stopped there.”

“Oh, yes,” said Pilon gravely. “There are things to
be learned in this story.”

The friends nodded appreciatively, for they liked a
story with a meaning.

"I knew a girl in Texas like that," said Danny. “Only

she didn’t change.

They called her the wife of the

second platoon. ‘Mrs. Second Platoon,’ they said.”

Pablo held up his hand. “There
story,” he said.

is

more to

this

“Let Jesus Maria tell the rest.”

“Yes, there is more. And it is not such a good story,
in the ending.

There was the viejo, over sixty. And

Petey and Gracie went to live in another house. The
Viejo Ravanno was lonely, for he had always been with
Petey.

He didn’t know how to take up his time. He

just sat and looked sad, until

again. ’Tonia

one day he saw 'Tonia

was fifteen, and she was prettier, even,

than Gracie. Half the soldiers from the Presidio fol-

lowed her around like little dogs.

^ S53 ^

“Now as it had been with Petey, so it was with the
old man. His desire made him ache all over. He could
not eat or sleep. His cheeks sunk in, and his eyes stared
like the eyes of a marihuana smoker.

He carried candy

to ’Tonia, and she grabbed the candy out of his hands

and laughed at him. He said, ‘Come to me, little dear
one, for I am thy friend.’ She laughed again.

“Then the viejo told Petey about it. And Petey
laughed too. ‘You old

fool,’

Petey said. ‘You’ve had

enough women in your life. Don’t run after babies.’
But it did no good. Old Man Ravanno grew sick with
longing. They are hot-blooded, those Ravannos. He hid
in the grass and watched her pass by. His heart ached
in his breast.

“He needed money to buy presents, so he got a job
in the Standard Service Station.

He raked the gravel
He put water

and watered the flowers at that station.

in the radiators and cleaned the windshields. With every

cent he bought presents for ’Tonia, candy and ribbons

and dresses. He paid to have her picture taken with
colors.

“She only laughed more, and the viejo was nearly
crazy. So he thought, ‘If marriage in the church made

^ 254

Grade a good woman, it will make ’Tonia a good
woman, too.’ He asked her to marry him. Then she
laughed more than ever. She flung up her skirts at him
to worry him. Oh, she was a devil, that ’Tonia.”

“He was a fool,” said Pilon smugly. “Old men should
not run after babies. They should sit in the sun.”
Jesus Maria went on irritably, “Those Ravannos are
different,”

he said, “so hot-blooded.”

“Well, it was not a decent thing,” said Pilon. “It was

a shame on Petey.”
Pablo turned to him. “Let Jesus Maria go on. It is

Sometime we will listen

his story, Pilon, not thine.

to thee.”

Jesus Maria looked gratefully to Pablo. "I was telling.

“The viejo could not stand it any more. But he was

He was not like Pilon.
He could not think of anything new. The Viejo Ra-

not a man to invent anytliing

vanno thought like this; ‘Gracie married Petey because
he hanged himself.

I

will

hang myself, and maybe

’Tonia will marry me.' And then he thought, ‘If no

one finds me soon enough, I will be dead. Some one

must find me.'

“You must know,” said Jesus Maria, “at that service

^ 255

station there is a tool house. Early

m the morning, the

viejo went down and unlocked the tool house and raked'

the gravel

and watered the flowers before the station

opened. The other men came to work at eight o’clock.
So,

one morning, the viejo went into the tool house

and put up a rope. Then he waited until it was eight

He saw the men coming. He put the rope
around his neck and stepped off a work bench. And
o’clock.

just when

he did that, the door of the tool shed blew

shut.”

Broad smiles broke out on the faces of the friends.
Sometimes, they thought, life was very, very humorous.

“Those men did not miss him right away,” Jesus
Maria went on. “They said, ‘He is probably drunk,
that old one.’ It was an hour later when they opened

the door of that tool shed.” He looked around.

The smiles were still on the faces of die friends, but
they were changed smiles. “You see,” Jesus Maria said,
“it is funny.

But it squeezes in you, too,”

“What did ’Tonia say?” Pilon demanded. “Did she
read a lesson and change her living?"

“No. She did not. Petey told her, and she laughed.
3|^tey laughed too.

But he was ashamed. ’Tonia said.

‘What an old fool he was,’ and ’Tonia looked at Petey
that way she had.

"Then Petey said, ‘It is good to have a little sistei
like thee.

Some night I will walk in the woods with

Then ’Tonia laughed again, and ran away a
little. And she said, ‘Do you think I am as pretty as

thee.’

Gracie?’ So Petey followed her into the house.”

Pilon complained, ‘‘It is not a good story. There are
too many meanings and too many lessons in it. Some
of those lessons are opposite. There

is

not a story to

take into your head. It proves nothing.”
‘‘I

like it,” said Pablo. ‘‘I like it because it hasn’t any

meaning you can see, and still it does seem to mean
something, I can’t tell what.”

The sun had turned across noon, and the air was hot.
“I wonder what tlie Pirate will bring to eat,” said

Danny.
‘‘There is a mackerel run in the bay,” Pablo observed.
Pilon’s eyes brightened. ‘‘I have a plan that I thought

out,” he said. ‘‘When I was a little boy, we lived by

the railroad. Every day when the train went by,

my

brothers and I threw rocks at the engine, and the fire-

man threw coal at us. Sometimes we picked up a

^ 257 0

bucketful of coal, and took it in to our mother. Now
I thought maybe we could take rocks down on the pier.

When the boats come near, we will call names, we will
throw rocks. How can those fishermen get back at us?
Can they throw oars, or nets? No. They can only throw
mackerel.”

Danny stood up joyfully. “Now there is a plan!” he

“How this little Pilon of ours is our friendl What
would we do without our Pilon? Come, I know where
cried.

there is a great pile of rocks.”
"I like mackerel better than any other fish,” said

Pablo.

^ 258

XV
How Danny brooded and became mad. How the
devil in the shape of Torrelh assaulted Danny’s

House.

There is a changeless quality about

Monterey. Nearly every day in the morning

the sun shines in the windows on the west sides of the
streets;

and, in the afternoons, on tlie east sides of the

streets.

Every day tlie red bus clangs back and forth

between Monterey and Pacific Grove. Every day the
canneries send a stink of reducing

fish

into the air.

Every afternoon the wind blows in from the bay and
sways the pines on the hills. The rock fishermen sit on
the rocks holding their poles, and their faces are graven

with patience and with cynicism.

On Tortilla Flat, above Monterey, the routine is
changeless, too; for there are only a given number of

^ 259 ^

adventures that Ojmelia Ruiz can have with her slowly

changing procession of sweethearts. She has been known
to take again a man long since discarded.

In Danny’s house there was even less change.

The

friends had sunk into a routine which might have been

monotonous for any one but a paisano— up in the morning, to sit in the sun and wonder what the Pirate would

The Pirate still cut pitchwood and sold it in
the streets of Monterey, but now he bought food with
bring.

the quarter he earned every day.

Occasionally the

friends procured some wine, and then there was singing

and fighting.

Time is more complex near the sea than in any other
place, for in addition to the circling of the sun and the

turning of the seasons, the waves beat out the passage
of time on the rocks

and the tides rise and fall as a

great clepsydra.

Danny began to feel the beating of time. He looked
at his friends,

and saw how with them every day was

the same. When he got out of his bed in the night and

stepped over the sleeping paisanos, he was angry with

them for being there. Gradually, sitting on the front
porch, in the sun, Daimy began to dream of the days

^ 860

of his freedom. He had slept in the woods in summer,

and in the warm hay of bams when the winter cold was
in.

The weight of property was not upon him. He re-

membered that the name of Danny was a name of storm.
Oh, the fights! The flights through the woods with an
outraged chicken under his arm! The hiding places in
the gulch when an outraged husband proclaimed feud!

Storm and

violence,

sweet violence!

When Danny

thought of the old lost time, he could taste again how

good the stolen food was, and he longed for that old
time again. Since his inheritance had lifted him, he had
not fought often. He had been drunk, but not adventurously so. Always the weight of the house was upon

him; always the responsibility to his friends.

Danny began to mope on the front porch, so that his
friends thought him

ill.

“Tea made from yerba buena will be good,” Pilon
suggested. “If you will go to bed, Danny, we will put

hot rocks to your feet.”
It was

not coddling Danny wanted, it was freedom.

For a month he brooded, stared at the ground, looked
with sullen eyes at his ubiquitous friends, kicked the
friendly dogs out of his way.

^ 261

In the end he gave up to his longing. One night he
ran away.

He went into the pine woods and disap-

peared.

When in the morning the friends awakened and
found him missing, Pilon said, “It is some lady. He is
in love.”

They left it there, for every man has a right to love.

The friends went on living as they had. But when a
week passed with no sign of Danny, they began to
worry. In a body they went to the woods to look for

him.

“Love is nice,” said Pilon. “We cannot blame any

man for following a girl, but a week is a week. It must
be a lively girl to keep Danny away for a week.”
Pablo said, “A little love is like a little wine. Too

much of either will make a man sick. Maybe Danny is
already sick. Maybe this girl is too lively.”
Jesus Maria was worried, too. “Is

it

not like the

Danny we know to be gone so long. Some bad thing has
happened.”

The Pirate took his dogs into the woods. The friends
advised the dogs, “Find Danny. He may be sick. Some-

^ 262 ^

where he may be dead, that good Danny who lets you
sleep in his house.”

The Pirate whispered to them, "Oh, evil, ungrateful
dogs, find our friend.”

But the dogs waved their tails

happily and sought out a rabbit and went kyoodling
after it.

The paisanos ranged all day through the woods, calling Danny’s name, looking in places they themselves

might have chosen to sleep in, the good hollows between
the roots of trees, the tliick needle beds, encircled by
bushes. They knew where a man would sleep, but they

found no sign of Danny.
“Perhaps he is mad,” Pilon suggested. "Some secret

worry may have turned his wit.”
In the evening they went back to Danny’s house and

opened the door and went in. Instantly they became
intense.

A thief had been busy. Danny’s blankets were

gone. All the food was stolen. Two pots were missing.
Pilon looked quickly at Big Joe Portagee, and then

he shook his head. “No, you were with us. You didn’t

do it.”

“Danny did it,” Pablo said excitedly. “Truly he is
mad. He is running through the woods like an animal.”

^ 263

Great care and worry settled on Danny’s house. ‘‘We

must find him,” the friends assured one another. ‘‘Some

harm will fall upon our friend in his craziness. We must
search through the whole world until we find him.”
They threw ofE their laziness. Every day they looked
for him, and they began to hear curious rumors. ‘‘Yes,

Danny was here last night. Oh. that drunk onel Oh,
that thief! For see, Danny knocked down the viejo with

a fence picket and he stole a bottle of grappa. What
kind of friends are these who let their friend do such
things?”
“Yes, we saw Danny. His eye was closed, and he was
singing, ‘Come into the woods and we will dance, little
girls,’ but

we would not go. We were afraid. That Danny

did not look very quiet,”

At the wharf they found more evidence of their
friend. “He was here,” the fishermen said.

to fight everybody. Benito

head. Then

“He wanted

broke an oar on Danny’s

Danny broke some windows, and then a

policeman took him to jail.”

Hot on the path of their wayward friend, they continued.

“McNear brought him in last night," the ser-

^ 264

geant said. “Some way he got loose before morning

When we catch him, we’ll give him six months.”
The friends were tired of the chase. They went home,
and to their horror, they found that the new sack of
potatoes that Pilon had found only that morning was

gone.

“Now it is too much,” Pilon cried. “Danny is crazy,
and he is in danger. Some terrible thing will happen
to him if we do not save him.”

“We will search,” said Jesus Maria.
“We will look behind every tree and every shed,”
Pablo guaranteed.

“Under the boats on the beach,” Big Joe suggested.

“The dogs will help,” the Pirate said.
Pilon shook his head. “That is not the way. Every

time we come to a place after Danny has gone. We must
wait in some place where he will come.

We must act

as wise men, not as fools.”

“But where will he come?”

The light struck all of them at once. "Torrelli’sl
Sooner or later, Darmy will go to Torrelli’s. We must

go there to catch him, to restrain him in the madness
that has fallen upon him.”

^ 265 ^

“Yes/' they agreed.

“We must save Danny.”

In a body they visited Torrelli, and Torrelli would
not let them in. “Ask me,” he cried through the door,

“have I seen Danny? Danny brought three blankets and

two cooking pots, and I gave him a gallon of wine. What
did that devil do tlien? My wife he insulted and me he

bad names.

called

My baby he spanked, my dog he

He stole the hammock from my porch.” Torrelli gasped with emotion. “I chased him to get my
hammock back, and when I returned, he was with my
kicked!

wife!

Seducer, thief, drunkard!

That

is

your friend

Danny! I myself will see that he goes to penitentiary.”

The eyes of the friends glinted. “Oh, Corsican pig,”
Pilon said evenly. “You speak of our friend. Our friend
is not well.”

Torrelli locked the door. They could hear the bolt
slide,

but Pilon continued to speak through the door.

"Oh, Jew,” he said. “If thou wert a little more charitable with thy wine, these tilings would not

happen.

See that thou keepest that cold frog which is thy tongue

from dirtying our friend. See thou treatest him gently,
for his friends are many.

We will tear thy stomach out

if thou art not nice to him.”

^ 266 ^

Torrelli made no sound inside the locked house, but

he trembled with rage and fear at the ferocity of the
tones.

He was relieved when he heard the footsteps of

the friends receding up the path.

That night, after the friends had gone to bed, they
heard a stealthy step in the kitchen. They kne^\r it was

Danny, but he escaped before they could catch him.

They wandered about in the dark, calling disconsolately,
“Come, Danny, our little sugar friend, we need thee
with us.”

There was no reply, but a thrown rock struck Big
Joe in the stomach and doubled him up on the ground.

Oh, how the friends were dismayed, and how their
hearts were heavyl

“Danny is running to his death,” they said sadly.

“Our little friend is in need, and we cannot help him.”
It was difficult to keep house now, for Danny had
stolen nearly everything in it.

A chair turned up at a

bootlegger’s. All the food was taken, and once, when they

were searching for Danny in the woods, he stole the
air-tight stove;

but it was heavy, he abandoned it in

the gulch. Money there was none, for Danny stole the
Pirate’s wheelbarrow

and traded it to Joe Ortiz for a

^ 267

bottle of whisky.

Now all peace had gone from Danny's

house, and there was only worry and sadness.

“Where is our happiness gone?” Pablo mourned.
“Somewhere we have sinned.

It

is

a judgment.

We

should go to confession.”

No more did they discuss the marital parade of Cornelia Ruiz.

Gone were the moralities, lost were the

humanities. Truly the good life lay in ruins. And into
the desolation came the rumors.

“Danny committed partial rape last night.

’

“Danny has been milking Mrs. Palochico’s goat ”

“Danny was in a fight with some soldiers the night
before last.”

Sad as they were at his moral decay, the friends were
not a little jealous of the good time Danny was having.
“If he is not crazy, he will be punished,” said Pilon.

“Be sure of that. Danny is sinning in a way which, sin
for sin, beats any record I ever heard of. Oh, the pen-

ances when he wants to he decent againi In a few weeks

Danny has piled up more sins than Old Ruiz did in a
lifetime.”

That night Danny, unhindered by the friendly dogs,
crept into the house as silently as the moving shadow of

^ 268

a limb under a

street light,

and wantonly he stole

Pilon’s shoes. In the morning it did not take Pilon long

to understand what had happened.

He went firmly to

the porch and sat down in the sun and regarded his
feet.

“Now he has gone too far,” Pilon said. “Pranks he
has played, and we were patient. But now he turns to
crime. This is not the Danny we know. This is another

man, a bad man. We must capture this bad man.”
Pablo looked complacently down at his shoes. “Maybe
this is only a

prank too,” he suggested.

“No,” Pilon said severely. “This is crime. They were
not very good shoes, but it is a crime against friendship
to take them.

And that is the worst kind of crime. If

Danny will steal the shoes of his friends, there is no
crime he will stop at.”

The friends nodded in agreement. “Yes, we must
catch him,” said Jesus Maria of the humanities. "We

know he is sick. We will tie him to his bed and try to
cure

him of the sickness.

We must try to wipe the

darkness from his brain.”

“But now,” said Pablo, “before we catch him, we

must remember to put our shoes under our pillows

when we sleep.”

The house was in a state of siege. All about it raged
Danny, and Danny was having a wonderful time.

Seldom did the face of Torrelli show any emotions
but suspicion and anger. In his capacity as bootlegger,

and in his dealings with the people of Tortilla Flat,
those two emotions were often called into his heart, and
their line was written on his face. Moreover, Torrelli

had never visited any one. He had only to stay at home
to have every one visit him. Consequently, when Torrelli

walked up the road toward Danny’s house in the

morning, his face suffused with a ferocious smile of
pleasure and anticipation, the children ran into their

yards and peeked through the pickets at him; the dogs
caressed their stomachs with their tails

backward, fearful looks;

and fled with

men meeting him, stepped

out of his path, and clenched their

fists

to repel a

madman.
This morning the fog covered the sky. The sun, after
a number of unsuccessful skirmishes, gave up and retired

behind the gray folds. The pine trees dripped

^ 270 {§

dusty dew on the ground; and in the jEaces o£ the few

people

who were about, the day was reflected with

sombre looks and gray skins. There were no hearty
greetings.

There was none of

that

human idealism

which blandly hopes this day will be better than all
other days.

Old Roca, seeing Torrelli smiling, went home and
<old his wife, “That one has just killed and eaten his
children. You will seel”

Torrelli was happy, for in his pocket there was a
folded, precious paper. His fingers sought his roat again

and again, and pressed until a little crackling sound
assured Torrelli that the paper was still there.

As he

walked through the gray morning, he muttered to
himself.

“Nest of snakes,” he said. “I will wipe out this pestilence of Danny’s friends. No more will I give wine for

goods, and have the goods stolen again. Each man alone
is not so bad, but the nest of theml

Madonna, look down

how I will cast them out into the street! The toads, the
lice,

the stinging flies!

When they sleep in the woods

again, they will not be so proud.

“I

would have them know

that Torrelli has

^ 871 ^

tri-

umphed. They thought to cheat me, to despoil my house
of furniture and my wife of virtue

I

They will see that

Torrelli, the great sufferer, can strike back.

Oh, yes,

they will seel”

Thus he muttered as he walked, and his fingers
crackled the paper in his pocket.

The trees dripped

mournful drops into the dust. The seagulls circled in
the air, screaming tragically. Torrelli moved like gray

Fate on Danny’s house.

In Danny’s house there was gloom. The friends could
not sit on the porch in the sunshine, for there was no
sunshine.

No one can produce a better reason for

gloom. They had brought back the stolen stove from
the gulch and set it up. They clustered to it now, and

Johnny Pom-pom, who had come to call, told the news
he had.
"Tito Ralph,” he said, "is no longer the Jailer down
at the city jail. No, this morning the police judge sent

him away.”
“I liked Tito Ralph,” said Pilon. “When a man was

in jail, Tito Ralph would bring him a little wine. And

he knew more stories than a hundred other men. Why
did he lose his job, Johnny Pom-pom?"

^ 27a

jjf

‘That is what I came to tell. Tito Ralph, you know,

was often in jail, and he was a good prisoner. He knew

how a jail should be run. After a while he knew? more
about the jail than any one. Then Daddy Marks, the
old jailer, died, and Tito Ralph took his place. Never
has there been such a good jailer as Tito Ralph. Every-

thing he did just right. But he has one little fault. When

he drinks wine, he forgets he is the jailer. He escapes,

and they have to catch him.”

The friends nodded. “I know,” said Pablo. “I have
heard he is hard to catch, too. He hides.”
“Yes,” continued Johnny Pom-pom, “except for that,

he is the best jailer they ever had. Well, this is the thing
that I came to tell. Last night Danny had enough wine
for ten men, and he drank it. Then he drew pictures on

windows. He was very rich; he bought eggs to tlirow at
a Chinaman. And one of those eggs missed the China-

man and hit a policeman. So, Danny was in jail.
"But he was rich. He sent Tito Ralph out to get some
wine, and then some more wine. There were four men
in the jail. They all drank wine. And at last that fault
of Tito Ralph’s came out. So he escaped, and all the
others escaped with him.

They caught Tito Ralph

^ 273 £5

this morning and told him he could not

be jailer any

more. He was so sad that he broke a window, and now

he is in jail again.”
“But Danny,” Pilon cried. “What about Danny?”
“Oh, Danny,” said Johnny Pom-pom, “he escaped
too. They did not catch him.”

The friends sighed in dismay.
“Danny is getting bad,” Pilon said seriously. “He
will not come to a good end. I wonder where he got
tlie

money.”

It was at this

moment that the triumphant Torrelli

opened the gate and strode up the path. The Pirate’s
dogs got up nervously from their comer and moved to-

ward the door, snarling. The friends looked up and
questioned one another with their eyes. Big Joe picked

up the pick-handle that had so lately been used on him.

The heavy confident step of Torrelli pounded on the
porch. The door flew open, and there stood Torrelli,
smiling. He did not bluster at them. No, he approached
as delicately as a house cat.

He patted them kindly, as

a house cat pats a cockroach.

“Ah, my friends,” he said gently, at their looks of
alarm. "My dear good friends and customers. My heart

^ 274 ^

is

torn that I must be a carrier of bad news to those

whom I love.”
Pilon leaped up. “It is Danny. He is sick, he is hurt.

Tell us.”
Torrelli shook his head daintily. “No, my little ones,
it is

not Danny. My heart bleeds, but I must tell you

that you cannot live here any more.” His eyes gloated
at the

amazement his words wrought. Every mouth

dropped open, every eye went blank with astonishment

"That is foolish,” Pablo cried. “Why can't we live
here any more?”
Torrelli’s hand went lovingly into his breast pocket,

and his fingers brought out the precious paper and
waved it in the air. “Imagine my suffering,” TorreUi
went on. “Danny does not own this house any more.”

“What!” they cried. “What do you mean? How does
not Danny own his house any more? Speak, oh, Corsican pig.”

Torrelli giggled, a thing so terrible that the paisanos

stepped back from him. “Because,” he said, “the house
belongs to me.

Danny came to me and sold me his

house for twenty-five dollars last night.” Fiendishly he

watched the thoughts crowd on their faces.

^ 275 ^

It is

a lie,” their faces said.

“Danny would not do

such a thing.” And then, “But Danny has been

doing

many bad things lately. He has been stealing from us.
Maybe he has sold the house over our heads ”
“It is a lie,” Pilon cried aloud. “It is a dirty

Torrelli smiled

wop lie.”

on and waved the paper. “Here I

have proof,” he said. “Here is the paper Danny

signed.

It is what we of business call a bill of sale.”

Pablo came to him furiously. “You got him

drunk.

He did not know what he did.”
Torrelli opened the paper a little bit. “The

not be interested in that,” he said

law will

“And so, my dear

my terrible duty to tell you that you
must leave my house. I have plans for it.” His
little friends, it is

face lost

its

smile, then,

and all the cruelty came back into it.

“If you are not out by noon, I will

send a policeman.”
Pilon moved gently toward him. Oh,
beware, Tor-

when Pilon moves smiling on youl Run,
hide
yourself in some iron room and weld up
the door. “I do
relli,

not understand these things,” Pilon
said gently. “Of
course I am sad that Danny should do
Torrelli giggled ag^in.

^ 276 ^

a thing like this.”

”

/‘I never

had a house

to

sell,”

Pilon continued.

"Danny signed this paper, is that it?”
“Yes,” Torrelli

mimicked him, “Danny signed this

paper. That is it.”

Pilon blundered on, stupidly. “That is the thing that
proves you own this house?”
"Yes, oh, little fool.

This is the paper that proves

it.”

Pilon looked puzzled. “I thought you must take

it

down and have some record made.”
Torrelli laughed scornfully.

Oh, beware, Torrelhl

Do you not see how quietly these snakes are moving?
There is Jesus Maria in front of the door. There is
Pablo by the kitchen door. See Big Joe’s knuckles white

on the pick-handle.
Torrelli said,

“You know nothing of business, little

hoboes and tramps. When I leave here I shall take this
paper down and
It

—

happened so quickly that the last words belched

out explosively. His feet flew up in the air. He landed
with a great thump on the floor and clawed at the air
with his fat hands. He heard the stove-lid clang.
“Thieves,” he screamed.

The blood pressed up his

^ 277

neck and into his face. “Thieves,

oh, rats and dogs, give

me my paper.”
him, looked amazed.

Pilon, standing in front of

“What is this paper you

“Paper?” he asked politely.

speak o£ so passionately?

“My bill of sale, my ownership. Oh,

the police will

hear of this!”
-I do not recall a paper.”

said Pilon. “Pablo, do you

know what is this paper he talks

about?

“Paper?” said Pablo. “Does he

mean a newspaper or

a cigarette paper?”

“Johnny Pom-pom?

Pilon continued with the roll.
that one,” said Johnny Pomis dreaming, maybe,

“He

pom.
“Jesus Maria? Do you know

of a paper?”

“I think he is drunk,” Jesus

Maria said in a scandal-

ized voice. “It is too early in

the morning to be drunk.”

“Joe Portagee?”
“I wasn’t here,” Joe insisted.

“I just came in now."

“Pirate?”

“He don’t have no paper,” the Pirate

turned to his

dogs, "do he?”

Pilon turned back to the

apoplectic Torrelli.

^ 278 0

“You

are mistaken, my friend. It is possible that I might have

been wrong about this paper, but you can see for yourself that no one but you saw this paper.

Do you blame

me when I think that maybe there was no paper? Maybe
you should go to bed and rest a little.”
Torrelli was too stunned to shout any more.

They

turned him about and helped him out of the door and
sped him on his way, sunk in the awfulness of his defeat.

And then they looked at the sky, and were glad; for
the sun had fought again, and this time won a pathway
through the fog. The friends did not go back into the
house. They sat happily down on the front porch.

“Twenty-five dollars,” said Pilon. “I wonder what he
did with the money.”

The sun, once its first skirmish was won, drove the
fog headlong from the sky. The porch boards warmed
up, and the flies sang in the light. Exhaustion had settled

on the friends.
“It

was a close thing,” Pablo said wearily. “Danny

should not do such things.”

"We will get all our wine from Torrelli to make it
up to him,” said Jesus Maria.

A bird hopped into the rose bush and flirted its tail.

^ 279

casual hymn to the
Mis. Morales’ new chickens sang a
The dogs, in the front yard, thoughtfully scratched

sun.

all over and gnawed their tails.

friends

At the sound of footsteps from the road, the
welcoming smiles.
looked up, and then stood up with
of
Danny and Tito Ralph walked in the gate, and each

them carried two heavy hags. Jesus Maria

darted into

jars.

The friends

the house and brought out the fruit
noticed that Danny looked a little

tired when

he set

his jugs on the porch.

“It is hot climbing that hill,” Danny

said.

“Tito Ralph,” cried Johnny Pom pom, “I

heard you

were put in jail/’
escaped again/’ Tito Ralph said wanly-

I still
*

had the keys.”

The fruit jars gurgled full. A great sigh escaped from
the men. a sigh of relief that everything

was over.

Pilon took a big drink. “Danny,” he said, “that pig,
Torrelli, came up here this morning with

lies.

He had

a paper he said you signed.”

Danny looked startled. “Where is that paper?” he
demanded.
“Well,” Pilon continued. “We knew it was a lie, so

^ 280 {§

we burned that paper. You didn’t sign it, did you?”
“No,” said Danny, and he drained his jar.
“It would be nice to have something to eat,” observed

Jesus Maria.

Danny smiled sweetly. “I forgot. In one of those bags
are three chickens and some bread.”

So great was Pilon’s pleasure and relief that he stood

up and made a little speech. “Where is there a friend
like our friend?”

he declaimed. “He takes us into his

house out of the cold. He shares his good food with us,

and his wine. Ohee, the good man, the dear friend.”

Danny was embarrassed. He looked at the floor. “It
is

nothing,” he murmured. “It has no merit.”

But Pilon’s joy was so great that it encompassed the
world, and even the evil things of the ivorld. “We must

do something nice some time for Torrelli,” he said.

^ 281 ^

i

XVI
How through sacrifice
Danny's Friends gai^e a party. How Danny was

Of the sadness of Danny.

T ranslated.

W

HEN Danny came back to

his house and to his friends after his amok, he was not

conscience stricken, but he was very tired. The rough
fingers of violent experience had harped upon his soul

He began to live listlessly, arising from bed only to sit
nn the porch, under the rose of Castile; arising from the

porch only to eat; arising from the table only to go to
bed. The talk flowed about him and he listened, but he

did not care. Cornelia Ruiz had a quick and superb run
of husbands,

and no emotion was aroused in Danny

When Big Joe got in his bed one evening, so apathetic
was Danny that Pilon and Pablo had to beat Big Joe for
him. When Sammy Rasper, celebrating a belated New

^ 283

Year with a shotgun and a gallon of whisky, killed a

cow and went to jail, Danny could not even be drawn
into a discussion of the ethics of the case, although the

arguments raged about him and although his judgment
was passionately appealed to.
After a while it came about that the friends began
to worry about Danny.

“He is changed,” said Pilon.

“He is old.”
Jesus Maria suggested, “This Danny has crowded the

good times of a life into a little three weeks. He is sick
of fun.”

In vain the friends tried to draw him from the cavern
of his apathy. In the mornings, on the porch, they told
their funniest stories. They reported details of the love
life of Tortilla Flat so penetrating that they would have

been of interest to a dissection class. Pilon winnowed
the Flat for news, and brought home every seedling of
interest to

Danny; but there was age in Danny’s eyes

and weariness.

“Thou art not well,” Jesus Maria insisted in vain.
“There is some bitter secret in thine heart.”
“No,” said Danny.
It

was noticed that he let flies crawl on his feet a

^ 284 ^

long time, and that when he did slap them off there was

no art in his stroke. Gradually the high spirits, the
ready laughter went out of Danny’s house and tumbled
into the dark pool of Danny’s quietness.

Oh, it was a pity to see him, that Danny who had
fought for lost causes, or any other kind; that Danny

who could drink glass for glass with any man in the
world; that Danny who responded to the look of love
like an aroused tiger.

Now he sat on his front porch in

the sunlight, his blue-jeaned knees drawn
his chest, his

up against

arms hanging over, his hands dangling

from limp wrists, his head bent foiward as though by
a heavy black thought. His eyes had no light of desire

nor displeasure nor joy nor pain.

Poor Danny, how has life left thee! Here thou sittest
like the first man before the world grew up around him;

and like the last man, after the world has eroded away.
But see, Danny! Thou art not alone. Thy friends are
caught in this state of thine. They look at thee from
their eye-comers.

They wait like expectant little dogs

for the first waking movement of their master. One joyful word from thee,

Danny, one joyful look, and they

will bark and chase their tails

Thy life is not thine own

^ 286 ^

What Danny needs is lots of wine, and maybe a party.
Where can we get wine?”
Their minds combed the possibilities of Monterey
like rat terriers in a bam, but there were no rats. These

friends were urged on by altruism more pure than most

men can conceive. They loved Danny.
Jesus

Maria

said,

finally,

“Chin Kee

is

packing

squids.”

Their minds bolted, turned with curiosity and looked
at the thing, crept steathily back and sniffed it. It was

several

moments before

their shocked

imaginations

could become used to the thing. “But after all,

why

not?” they argued silently. “One day would not be so

bad—only one day.”
Their faces showed tlie progress of the battle, and

how they were defeating their fears in the interest of
Danny’s welfare.

“We will do it,” Pilon said. “To-morrow we will all
go down and cut squid, and to-morrow night we will
give a party for Danny.”

When Danny awakened the next morning, the house
was deserted He got up from his bed and looked
through the silent rooms. But Danny was not a man to

^ 288 ^

brood very long. He gave it up as a problem, and then
as a thought.

He went to the front porch and listlessly

sat down.
Is it premonition,
is

Danny? Do you fear the fate that

closing in on you? Are there no pleasures left? No.

Danny is as sunk in himself as he had been for a week.

Not so Tortilla Flat. Early tlie rumor flew about
“Danny’s friends are cutting squids for Chin Kee.” It

was a portent,

like the overthrotv of

government, or

even of the solar system. It was spoken of in the street,

who were just dien
hurrying to tell it. “All of Danny’s friends are down
called over back fences to ladies

cutting squids.”

The morning was electric with the news. There must
be some reason, some secret. Mothers instructed their
children

and sent them running toward Chin Kee’s

squid yard.

Young matrons waited anxiously behind

their curtains for later news. And news came.

“Pablo has cut his hand with a squid knife.”

“Chin Kee has kicked the Pirate’s dogs.”
Riot.

“The dogs are back.”
“Pilon looks grim.”

^ *89 ^

A few small bets were laid. For months nothing so
exciting had happened. During one whole morning not

a single person spoke of Cornelia Ruiz. It was not until
the noon hour that tlie real news leaked out, but then
it

came with a rush.

“They are going to give a big party for Danny.”
“Every one is going.”
Instructions began to emerge from the squid yard.

Mrs. Morales dusted her phonograph and picked out

her loudest records. Some spark flared, and Tortilla Flat

was tinder. Seven friends, indeed, to give a party for
though to say Danny had only seven

Danny!

It is as

friends!

Mrs. Soto descended upon her chicken yard

with a cleaver. Mrs. Palochico poured a bag of sugar
into her largest cooking pot to

make dulces. A dele-

gation of girls went into

Woolworth

the

store

in

Monterey and bought the complete stock of colored
crepe paper. Guitars and accordions cried experimentally through the Flat.

News! More news from the squid yard. They are
going to make it. They are firm. They will have at least
fourteen dollars. See that fourteen gallons of wine are
ready.

^ 290 ^

Torrelli was overwhelmed with business. Every one

wanted to buy a gallon to take to Danny’s house. Torrelli himself,

caught in the fury of the movement, said

to his wife,

“Maybe we will go to Danny’s house. I

will take a few gallons for my friends.”

As the afternoon passed, waves of excitement poured
over the flat. Dresses unworn in a lifetime were unpacked and hung to air. Shawls the moths had yearned
for during two hundred years hung from porch railings

and exuded tlie odor of moth balls.

And Danny? He sat like a half-melted man. He moved
only when the sun moved. If he realized that every inhabitant of Tortilla Flat had passed his gate that after-

noon, he gave no sign. Poor Danny! At least two dozen
pairs of eyes

watched his front gate. At about four

o’clock he stood up, stretched and sauntered out of his
yard, toward Monterey.

Why, they hardly waited until he was out of sight.
Oh, the twisting and stringing of green and yellow and
red crepe paper! Oh, the candles shaved, and the shavings thrown on the floor!

Oh, the mad children who

skated the wax in evenly.

Food appeared. Basins of

^ 291

rice,

pots of steaming

chicken, dumplings to startle youl And the wine came,
gallons and gallons of it. Martinez dug up a keg of
tato whisky

po-

from his manure pile and carried it to

Danny’s house.

At five-thirty the friends marched up the hill, tired
and bloody, but triumphant. So must the Old Guard
have looked when they returned to Paris after Austerlitz.

They saw the house, bristling with color. They

laughed, and their weariness fell from them. They were
so happy that tears came into their eyes.

Mama Cliipo walked into the yard followed by her
two sons who carried a washtub of salsa pura between
them. Paulito, that rich scamp, rushed the fire under
a big kettle of beans and cliili. Shouts, songs broken
shrieks

of

oil,

women, the general turmoil of excited

children.

A carful of apprehensive policemen drove up from
Monterey. “Oh, it is only a party. Sure, we’ll

have a

glass of wine. Don’t kill anybody.’’

Where is Danny? Lonely as smoke on a clear cold
night, he drifts through Monterey in the

evening. To
the post-office he goes, to the station, to the
pool rooms

on Alvarado Street, to the wharf where the black

^ 292 {§

water

mourns among the

What is it, Danny? What
makes you feel this way? Danny didn’t know. There was
piles.

an ache in his heart like the farewell to a dear woman;
there was vague sorrow in him like the despair of au-

tumn. He walked past the restaurants he used to smell
with interest, and no appetite was aroused in him. He

walked by Madam Zuca’s great establishment, and exchanged no obscene jests with tlie girls

m the windows.

Back to the wharf he went. He leaned over the rail and
looked into the deep, deep water. Do you know, Danny,

how the wine of your life is pouring into the fruit jars
of the gods? Do you see the procession of your days in

the oily water among the piles? He remained motionless,
staring down.

They were worried about him at Danny’s house,
when it began to get dark. The friends left the party and
trotted down the hill into Monterey, They asked, “Have

you seen Danny?’’
"Yes, Danny walked by here an hour ago. He walked

slow.”

Pilon and Pablo hunted together. They traced their
friend over the route he had followed, and at last they

saw him, on the end of the dark pier. He was lighted

^ 293

by a dim electric wharf light. They hurried out to him.
Pablo did not mention it then, but ever afterwards it

was his custom, when Danny was mentioned, to describe what he saw as he and Pilon walked out on the

wharf toward Danny. “There he stood,” Pablo always
said. “I could just see him, leaning on the rail. I looked

at him, and then I saw something else

At first it looked

like a black cloud in the air over Danny’s head.

And

then I saw it was a big black bird, as big as a man. It

hung in the air like a hawk over a rabbit hole. I crossed
myself and said two Hail Marys. The bird was gone

when we came to Danny.”
Pilon did not see

it.

Moreover, Pilon did not re-

member Pablo crossing himself and saying the Hail
Marys. But he never interfered with the story, for it

was Pablo’s stor/.

They walked rapidly toward Danny; the wharf boards

drummed hollowly under their feet. Danny did not
turn. They took him by the arms and turned him about.
“Dannyl What is wrong?”
“Nothing. I’m all right.”

“Are you sick, Danny?”
“No.”

^ 294 {3

“Then what is it that makes you so sad?”
“I don’t know,” said Danny. “I just feel this way.
I don’t want to do anything.”

“Maybe a doctor could do something for you, Danny."
“I tell you I am not sick.”

“Then look,” Pilon cried. “We are having a party
for you at your house.
there,

Everybody in Tortilla Flat is

and music and wine and chicken! There arc

maybe twenty or thirty gallons of wine. And bright
paper hanging up. Don’t you want to come?”

Danny breathed deeply. For a moment he turned
back to the deep black water. Perhaps he whispered to
the gods a promise or a defiance.

He swung around again to his friends. His eyes were
feverish.

“You’re goddam right I want to go. Hurry

up. I am thirsty. Any girls there?”

“Lots of girls. All the girls.”

“Come on, then. Hurry up.”
He led tliem, running up the hill. Long before they
arrived they could hear the sweetness of the music

through the pines, and the shrill notes of excited happy
voices.

The three belated ones arrived at a dead run.

Danny lifted his head and howled like a coyote. Jars

^ 295 13

of wine were held out to him.

He took a gulp from

each one.

That was a party for you! Always afterward when a

man spoke of a party with enthusiasm, some one was
sure to say with reverence, “Did you go to that party
at Danny’s house?’’

And, unless the first speaker were

a newcomer, he had been there. That was a party for

you! No one ever tried to give a better one. Such a thing

was unthinkable; for within two days Danny’s party
was lifted out of possible comparison with all other
parties that ever were. What man came out of that night

without some glorious cuts and bruises? Never had there

been so many fights; not fights between two men, but
roaring battles that raged through whole clots of men,

each one for himself.

Oh, tlie laughter of women! Thin and high and
brittle as spun glass. Oh, the lady-like shrieks of protest

from the gulch. Father Ramon was absolutely astounded

and incredulous at the confessions the next week. The
whole happy soul of Tortilla Flat tore itself from restraint and arose into the air,

one ecstatic unit. They

danced so hard that the floor gave way in one comer.

^ 296 ^

let some squirt say with excitement,

“Did you see me?

Did you see me ask that nigger wenches for a dance?
Did you seen us go ’round and 'round like a tom-cats?”
and some old, wise and baleful eye would be turned on
him. Some voice, sated with having known the limit

^ 297

*

of possibilities, would ask quietly, “Did you see Danny

the night of the party?”

Some time a historian may write a cold, dry, funguslike history of The Party.

He may refer to the moment

when Danny defied and attacked the whole party, men,

women and children, with a table-leg. He may conclude,
“A dying organism is often observed to be capable of
extraordinary endurance and strength.” Referring to

Danny’s super-human amorous activity that night, this

same historian may write with unshaking hand: “When
any living organism is attacked, its whole function seems
to aim toward reproduction.”

But I say, and the people of Tortilla Flat would say,

“To hell with it That Danny was a man for you!” No
one kept actual count, and afterwards, naturally, no
lady would willingly admit that she had been ignored;
so that the reputed prowess of Danny may be somewhat
overstated. One tenth of it would be an overstatement

for any one in the world.

Where Danny went, a magnificent madness followed.
It is passionately

averred in Tortilla Flat that Danny

alone drank three gallons of wine. It must be remembered, however, that Danny is now a god. In a few years

^ 298 ^

It

may be thirty gallons. In twenty years it may b<'

plainly remembered that the clouds flamed and spelled

DANNY in tremendous letters; that the moon dripped
blood; that the wolf of the world bayed prophetically

from the mountains of the Milky Way
Gradually a few of those whose stuff was less stem

than Danny’s began to wilt, to sag, to creep out from

under

foot.

Those who were

left,

feeling the lack,

shouted the louder, fought the more viciously, danced
the harder. In Monterey the motors of the fire tracks

were kept running and the firemen, in their red tin
hats and raincoats silently sat in their places and waited.

The night passed quickly, and still Danny roared
through the party.

What happened is attested by many witnesses, both
men and women. And although their value as witnesses
is sometimes attacked

on the ground that they had drunk

thirty gallons of wine and a keg of potato whisky, those

people are sullenly sure of the major points. It took

some weeks to get the story into line, some said one
thing,

some another. But gradually the account clari-

fied into the reasonable

form it now has and always

will have.

^ 299

Danny, say the people of Tortilla
rapidly changing his form.
terrible.

Flat,

had been

He had grown huge and

His eyes flared like the headlights of an au-

tomobile. There was something fearsome about him.

There he stood, in the room of his own house. He held
the pine table-leg in his right hand, and even

it

had

grown. Danny challenged the world.

“Who tvill fight?” he cried. "Is there no one left in
the world who is not afraid?” The people were

afraid;

that table-leg, so hideous and so alive,
terror to them all

had become a
Danny swung it back and forth. The

accordions wheezed to silence.

The dancing stopped.
The room grew chill and a silence seemed to roar in

the

air like an ocean.

"No one?” Danny cried again. “Am I alone in
world? Will no one fight with me?” The men

the

shuddered

before his terrible eyes, and watched
fascinated the
slashing path of the table-leg through
the air.

And no

one answered the challenge,

Danny drew himself up. It is said that his
missed touching the ceiling. "Then

I will go out to The

One who can fight. I will find The Enemy who

^ 300

head just

is worthy

of Danny!” He stalked to the door, staggering a little as

he went. The terrified people made a broad path for
him. He bent to get out of the door. The people stood
still

and listened.

Outside the house they heard his roaring challenge.

They heard the table-leg whistle like a meteor through
the air. They heard his footsteps charging down the
yard.

And tlien, behind the house, in the gulch, they

heard an answering challenge so fearful and so chill
that their spines wilted like nasturtium stems
frost. Even now,

under

when the people speak of Danny’s Op-

ponent, they lower their voices and look furtively about

They heard Danny charge to the fray. They heard his
last shrill cry of defiance, and tlien a thump.

And then

silence.

For a long moment the people waited, holding their
breaths lest the harsh rush of air from their lungs should

obscure some sound. But they listened in vain.

’life

night was hushed, and the gray dawn was coming.

Pilon broke the silence. “Something is wrong,” he

And Pilon it was who fiist rushed out of the door.
Brave man, no terror could restrain him. The people

said.

followed

him Back of the house they went, where

Danny’s footsteps had sounded, and there was no Danny.

They came to the edge of the gulch, where a sharp zigzag path led down to the bottom of that ancient watercourse wherein no stream had flowed for many genera-

tions.

The following people saw Pilon dart down the

path.

They went after him, slowly. And they found

Pilon at the bottom of the gulch, leaning

and twisted Danny. He had fallen

over a broken

forty feet.

Pilon

lighted a match “I think he is alive,”
he shrieked. “Run
for a doctor. Run for Father Ramon.”

^ 302 ^

The people scattered. Within fifteen minutes four
doctors were awakened, dragged from their beds
frantic paisanos.

liberateness

are

by

They were not allowed that slow de-

by which doctors love to show that they

no slaves to emotion. No! They were

hustled,

rushed, pushed, their instrument cases were shoved into
their hands by men hopelessly incapable of saying what

they wanted. Father

Ramon, dragged from his bed,

came panting up the hill, uncertain whether it was a
devil to drive out, a newborn baby to baptize before it

died or a lynching to attend. Meanwhile Pilon and

Pablo and Jesus Maria carried Danny up the hill and
laid him on his bed. They stood candles all about him.

Danny was breathing heavily.
First the doctors arrived.

They glanced suspiciously

at one another, considered precedence; but the moment

of delay brought threatening looks into the eyes of the
people. It did not take long to look Danny over. They

were all through by the time Father Ramon arrived.
I shall not go into the bedroom with Father Ramon,

for Pilon and Pablo and Jesus Maria and Big Joe and

Johnny Pom-pom and Tito Ralph and the Pirate and
the dogs were there; and they were Danny’s family

^ 303 ^

The

door was, and is, closed. For after all there is pride in

men, and some things cannot decently be pried into.

But in the big room, crowded to suffocation with the
people of Tortilla Flat, there was tenseness and a waiting
silence.

Priests

and doctors have developed a subtle

means of communication. When Father Ramon came
out of the bedroom his face had not changed, but at
sight of him the women broke into a high and terrible

The men shifted their feet like horses in a boxstall, and then went outside into the dawning. And the
wail.

bedroom door remained closed.

^ S04 w

XVII
How Danny’s sorrowing Friends defied the convert
tions.

How the Talismanic Bond teas burned

How each Friend departed alone.

Death is a personal matter.,
arousing sorrow, despair, fervor or dry-hearted philosophy. Funerals, on the other hand, are social functions.

Imagine going to a funeral without first polishing thsi
automobile. Imagine standing at a graveside not dre^ed
in your best dark suit and your best biack shoes, pol-

ished delightfully. Imagine sending flowers to a funeral

with no attached card to prove you had done the correct
thing. In

no social institution is the codified ritual of

behavior more rigid than in funerals. Imagine the indignation if the minister altered his sermon or experi-

mented with facial expression. Consider the shock if,
at the funeral parlors, any chairs were used but those

^ 305 {§

little

folding yellow torture chairs with the hard seats.

No, dying, a man may be loved, hated, mourned, missed;
but once dead he becomes the chief ornament of a complicated and formal social celebration.

Danny was dead, two days dead: and already he had
ceased to be Danny. Although the faces of the people

were decently and mournfully veiled with gloom, there
was excitement in their hearts.

The government has

promised a military funeral to all of its ex-soldier sons

who wish it. Danny was the first of Tortilla Flat to go,
and Tortilla Flat was ready critically to test the government promises. Already news had been sent to the
Presidio

and Danny’s body had been embalmed

at

government expense. Already a caisson was newly painted

and waiting in the artillery shed with a neat new flag
folded on top of it. Already orders of the day for Friday

were made out:

“Ten to eleven A.M., funeral. Escort, Squadron A,
11th

Cavalry,

nth

Cavalry

Band and Firing

Squad.”

Were these not things to set every woman in Tortilla
Flat window shopping at the National Dollar Store in

Monterey? During the day dark children walked the

^ 306 ^

streets of

for

Monterey begging flowers from the gardens

Danny’s funeral. And at night the same children

visited the same gardens to augment their bouquets.

At the party, the finest clothes had been worn. During
the two-day interval, those clothes had to be cleaned,

washed, starched, mended and ironed. The activity was
frantic.

The excitement was decently intense.

On the evening of the second day, Danny’s friends
were gathered in Danny’s house.

The shock and the

wine had worn off; and now they were horror-stricken,
for in all Tortilla Flat they, who had loved Danny most,

who had received the most from his hands, they, the
paisanos,

were the only ones who could not attend

Danny’s funeral. Through the murk of the headaches
they had been conscious of this appalling tragedy, but

only on this evening had the situation become so concrete that it must be faced. Ordinarily, their clothes were

The party had aged their jeans and blue
shirts by years. Where was the trouser knee unburst?
Where the shirt unripped? If any one else had died, they
unspeakable

could have borrowed clothes; but there was no person
in Tortilla Flat who was not going to wear his good
clothes to the funeral.

Only Cocky Riordan was not

^ 307

going, but Cocky was in quarantine tor smallpox, and

so were his clothes. Money might be begged or stolen to

buy one good suit, but money for six suits was simply
impossible to get.

You may say, did they not love Danny enough to go
to his funeral in rags? Would you go in rags when your

neighbors were dressed in finery? Would not the disrespect to Danny be more if they went in rags than if

they did not go at all?

The despair that lay on their hearts was incalculable.
They cursed tlieir fate. Through the front door they
could see Galvez parading by. Galvez had bought a new
suit for the funeral, and he had it on txventy-four hours

in advance. Tlie friends sat, chin in hand, crushed by
their ill fortune. Every possibility had been discussed.

Pilon, for once in his

life,

descended to absurdity.

"We might go out to-night and each one steal a suit,”
he suggested. He knew that was silly, for every suit
would be laid on a chair beside a bed that night. It
would be death to steal a suit.

“The Salvation Army sometimes gives suits,” said
Jesus Maria.

^ 308

“I have been tlieie,” Pablo said. “They have fourteen
dresses this time, but no suits.”

On every side Fate was against them. Tito Ralph
came in with his new green handkerchief sticking out
of his breast pocket, but the hostility he aroused made

him back apologetically out of the room.
“If we had a week, we could cut squids,” Pilon said
[

heroically.

“The funeral is tomorrow. We must look

in the eye at this thing. Of course we can go to the funeral all right.”

“How?” the friends demanded.

“We can go on the sidewalk, while the band and the
people march in the street.

It is all grass

around the

cemetery fence. We can lie there in the grass and see
everything.”

The friends looked at Pilon gratefully. They knew
how his sharp wits had been digging over possibilities.
But it was only half, less than half, to see the funeral.
Being seen at the funeral was the more important half.

This was the best that could be done.
“In this we learn a lesson,” said Pilon. “We must take
it to

heart that we should always have a good suit of

clothes laid by.

We can never tell what may happen.”

^ 310

There they left it, but they felt that they had failed.
All through the night they wandered in the town. What

yard then was not plundered of its finest blooms? What
flowering tree remained standing? In the morning the

hole in the cemetery that was to receive Danny’s body

was almost hidden by a mound of the finest flowers from
the best gardens in Monterey.
It is not always that Nature arranges her effects with

good taste. Truly, it rained before Waterloo; forty feet
of snow fell in the path of the Donner Party. But Friday

turned out a nice day. The sun arose as though this

were a day for a picnic. The gulls flew in across a smiling bay to the sardine canneries. The rock fishermen

took their places on the rocks for the ebbing tide. The
Palace Drug Company ran down its awnings to protect
the red hot-water bottles in its windows from the chemical action of the sun.

sign in his window.

Mr. Machado, the tailor, put a

Back In Ten Minutes, and went

home to dress for the funeral. Three purse seiners came
in, loaded with sardines. Louie Duarte painted his boat,

and changed

its

name from

Lolita

to

The Three

Cousins. Jake Lake, the cop, arrested a roadster from

Del Monte and turned it loose and bought a cigar.

^ 3“ ^

How can life go on its stupid course on
such a day? How can Mamie Jackson hose off her front
sidewalk? How can George W Merk write his fourth
and angriest letter to the water company? How can
It is a puzzle.

Charlie Marsh be as dirtily drunk as usual? It is sacrilege. It is outrage.

Danny’s friends aivakened sadly, and got up off the
floor.

Danny’s bed was empty. It was like the riderless

charger of an
grave.

officer

which follows

its

master to his

Even Big Joe Portagee had cast no covetous

glance at Danny’s bed. The sun shone enthusiastically

through the window and cast the delicate shadows of
spider webs on the floor.

“Danny was glad on mornings like this,” said Pilon.
After their trip to the gulch, the friends sat for a
while on the front porch and celebrated the memory of
their friend. Loyally they remembered and proclaimed

Danny’s virtues. Loyally they forgot his faults.

"And strong,” said Pablo. “He was as strong as a
mulel He could lift a bale of hay.”

They told little stories of Danny, of his goodness, his
courage, his piety.

All too soon it was time to go to the church, to stand

^ 312 ^

across the street in their ragged clothes.

They blushed

inwardly when luckier people went into the church,
dressed so beautifully, smelling so prodigally of Agua
Florida. The friends could hear the music and the shrill

drone of the service. From their vantage point they saw
the cavalry arrive, and the band with muffled drums,

and the firing squad, and the caisson with its three pairs
of horses, and a cavalryman on the near horse of each
pair. The mournful clop-clop of shod horses on asphalt

put despair in the hearts of the friends Helplessly they

watched the casket carried out and laid on the caisson,

and the flag draped over it. The officer blew his whistle,
raised his hand and threw it forward. The squadron
moved, the firing squad dropped its rifles. The drums
thundered their heart-breaking,

slow

rhythm.

The

The caisson moved.
The people walked majestically behind, men straight and
band played

stern,

its

sodden march.

women daintily holding their skirts up out of the

indelible trail of the cavalry. Every one was there, Cornelia Ruiz, Mrs.

Morales, Galvez, Torrelli

and his

plump wife, Mrs. Palochico, Tito Ralph the traitor.
Sweets Ramirez, Mr Machado, every one who amounted

^ 313 ^

to anything on Tortilla Flat,

and every one else, was

there.
Is it any wonder that the friends could not stand the

shame and misery of it? For a little while they slunk
along the sidewalk, bolstered with heroism.
Jesus Maria broke down first. He sobbed with shame,
for his father had been a rich and respected prize-fighter.

Jesus Maria put down his head and bolted; and the five

other friends followed, and the five dogs bounded be-

hind them.
Before the procession was in sight, Danny’s friends

were lying in the tall grass that edged the cemetery.

The service was short and military. The casket was lowered; the rifles cracked; the bugle sang taps, and at the

sound Enrique and Fluff, Pajarito and Rudolph and
Senor Alec Thompson laid back their heads and howled,

The Pirate was proud of them thenl
It

was over too soon; the friends walked hurriedly

away so that the people would not see them.

They had to pass Torrelli’s deserted house anywayj
on the way home. Pilon went in through a window and
brought out two gallons of wine. And then they walked

^ 314

slowly back to the Danny’s quiet house. Ceremoniously

they filled the fruit jars and drank.

“Danny liked wine/’ they said. “Danny was happy

when he had a little wine.”

The afternoon passed, and the evening came. Each
man, as he sipped his wine, roved through the past. At
seven o’clock a shamed Tito Ralph came in with a box
of cigars he had won on a punch board. The friends
lighted the cigars and spat, and opened the second gallon. Pablo tried a few notes of the song “Tuli Pan,” to

see whether his voice was gone for good.

“Cornelia Ruiz was alone to-day,” Pilon said speculatively.

“Maybe it would be all right to sing a few sad songs,’
said Jesus Maria.

“But Danny did not like sad songs,” Pablo insisted.

“He liked the quick ones, about lively women.”
They all nodded gravely. “Yes, Danny was a great
one for women.”
Pablo tried the second verse to “Tuli Pan,” and Pilon
helped a little, and the others joined in toward the end.

When the song was done, Pilon puffed at his cigar,
but it had gone out. “Tito Ralph,” he said, “Why don’t

^ 315

you get your guitar so we can sing a little better?” He
lighted his cigar and flipped the match.

The little burning stick landed on an old newspaper
against the wall

Each man started up to stamp it out;

and each man was struck with a celestial thought, and
settled back

They found one another’s eyes and smiled

the wise smiles of the deathless and hopeless ones. In a
reverie they watched the flame flicker and nearly die,

and sprout to life again. They saw it bloom on the
paper.

Thus do the gods speak with tiny caiftes. And

the men smiled on as the paper burned and the dry

wooden wall caught.

Thus must it be, oh, wise friends of Danny. The cord
that bound you together is cut. The magnet that drew

you has lost its virtue. Some stranger will own the house,
some joyless relative of Danny’s. Better that this symbol
of holy friendship, this good house of parties and fights,
of love and comfort, should die as Danny died, in one
last

glorious hopeless assault on the gods.

They sat and smiled. And the flame climbed like a
snake to the ceiling and broke through the roof and
roared.

Only then did the friends get up from their

chairs and walk like dreaming men out of Jthe door.

^ 316 ^

who profited by every lesson, took what was

Pilon,

left of the wine with

him.

The sirens screamed from Monterey. The trucks
roared up the hill in second gear. The searchlights
played among the trees. When the Department arrived,
the house was one great blunt spear of flame. The hoses
wet the

trees

and brush to keep the flames from

spreading

Among the crowding people of Tortilla Flat Danny’s
friends stood entranced and watched until at last the

house was a mound of black, steaming cinders. Then the
fire trucks turned and coasted away

down the hill.

The people of the Flat melted into the darkness.
Danny’s friends still stood looking at the smoking ruin.

They looked at one another strangely, and then back to
the burned house. And after a while they turned and

walked slowly away, and no two walked together.

Ivlodern Library of the World’s Best Books

COMPLETE LIST OF TITLES IN

THE MODERN LIBRARY
For convenience in ordering use number at right of title

ADAMS, HENRY

The Education of Henry Adams 76

AIKEN, CONRAD

A Comprehensive Anthology of

AIKEN, CONRAD
ANDERSOxN, SHERWOOD

Modern Amencan Poetry 127
Wmesburg, Ohio 104

Amencan Verse loi

ARISTOTLE
BALZAC

BEERBOHM, MAX
BELLAMY, EDWARD
BEMELMANS, LUDWIG
BENNETT, ARNOLD
BERGSON, HENRI
BIERCE, AMBROSE
BOCCACCIO
BRONTE, CHARLOTTE
BRONTE, EMILY
BUCK, PEARL
BURTON, RICHARD

Politics 228

Droll Stones 193
Zuleika Dobson 116

Looking Backward 22

My War with the United States 175
The Old Wives’ Tale 184
Creative Evolution 231
In the Midst of Life 133

The Decameron 71
Jane Eyre 64

Wuthermg Heights 106
The Good Earth 15
The Arabian Nights 201

BUTLER, SAxMUEL
BUTLER, SAMUEL
BYRNE, DONN
CALDWELL, ERSKINE
CANFIELD, DOROTHY
CARROLL, LEWIS
CASANOVA, JACQUES

Erewhon and Erewhon Revisited 136
The Way of All Flesh 13
Messer Marco Polo 43

CELLINI, BENVENUTO

Autobiography of Cellmi 150

CERVANTES

Don Quixote 174
The Canterbury Tales 161

CHAUCER
CHAUCER
CONFUCIUS
CONRAD, JOSEPH

CONRAD, JOSEPH
CONRAD, JOSEPH
CORNEILLE and RACINE
CORVO, FREDERICK BARON

God’s Little Acre 51

The Deepening Stream 200
Alice in Wonderland, etc.

79

Memoirs of Casanova 165

Troilus and Cressida 126

The Wisdom of Confucius 7
Heart of Darkness
(In Great Modern Short Stones 168)
Lord Jim 186
Victory 34
Six Plays of Corneille and Racine I94

A History of the Borgias 192

CKANE, STEPHEN
CUMMINGS, E E

DANTE

The Red Badge of Courage ijo
The Enormous Room 214
The Divine Comedy 208

DAUDET, ALPHONSE

Sapho 85

DAY, CLARENCE
DEFOE, DANIEL

Life -with Father 230

DEWEY, JOHN
DICKENS, CHARLES
DICKENS, CHARLES
DICKENS, CHARLES

Human Nature and Conduct 173
A Tale of Two Cities 189

Moll Flanders 122

David Copperfield no
Pickwick Papers 204

DINESEN, ISAK

Seven Gothic Tales 54

DOS PASSOS, JOHN
DOSTOYEVSKY, FYODOR
DOSTOYEVSKY, FYODOR
DOSTOYEVSKY, FYODOR
DOUGLAS, NORMAN

Three Soldiers 205

DREISER, THEODORE

DUMAS, ALEXANDRE
DUMAS, ALEXANDRE
DU MAURIER, DAPHNE
DU MAURIER, GEORGE
EDMAN, IRWIN
EDMAN, IRWIN

EDMONDS, WALTER D.
ELLIS, HAVELOCK
EMERSON, RALPH WALDO
FAULKNER, WILLIAM
FEUCHTWANGER, LION
FIELDING, HENRY
FIELDING, HENRY

FLAUBERT, GUSTAVE
FORESTER, C. S.
FORSTER, E M
FRANCE, ANATOLE
FRANKLIN, BENJAMIN

Crime and Punishment 199

The Brothers Karamazov 151
The Possessed 55
South Wind 5
Sister

Came 8

Camille 69

The Three Musketeers 143
Rebecca 227
Peter Ibbetson 207

The Philosophy of Plato 18 t
The Philosophy of Santayana 224
Rome Haul 191
The Dance of Life 160
Essays and Other Writings 91

Sanctuary 61

Power 206
Joseph Andrews 117

Tom Jones 185
Madame Bovary 28
The African Queen I02

A Passage to India 218
Penguin Island 210
Autobiography, etc. 39

GALSWORTHY, JOHN

The Apple Tree
(In Great Modern Short Stones 168)

GAUTIER, THEOPHILE

Mile

De Maupm,

One of Cleopatra’s Nights 53

GEORGE, HENRY
GIDE, ANDRfe
GLASGOW, ELLEN

GOETHE
GOETHE

Progress and Poverty 36

The Countei feiters 187
Barren Ground 25

Faust 177

The Sorrows of Werther
(In Collected German Stones 108)
Dead Souls 40

GOGOL, NIKOLAI
GRAVES, ROBERT

I,

HAMMETT, DASHIELL

The Maltese Falcon 45

Claudius 20

1

HAMSUN, KNUT
HARDY, THOMAS
HARDY, THOMAS
HARDY, THO^NfAS
HARDY, THOMAS

HART AND KAUFMAN
HART, LIDDELL

HAWTHORNE, NATHANIEL
HELLMAN, LILLIAN
HEMINGWAY, ERNEST
HEMINGWAY, ERNEST
HEMON, LOUIS

HOMER
HOMER
HORACE
HUDSON, W. H.
HUDSON, W H
HUGHES, RICHARD
HUGO, VICTOR
HUXLEY, ALDOUS
HUXLEY, ALDOUS
IBSEN, HENRIK

JAMES, HENRY
JAMES, HENRY
JAMES, WILLIAM
JAMES, WILLIAM
JEFFERS, ROBINSON

JEFFERSON, THOMAS
JOYCE, JAMES
JOYCE, JAMES

Growth of the Soil 12
Jude the Obscure 135
The Mayor of Casterbndge 17
The Return of the Native 12
Tess of the D’Urbervilles 72
Six Plays by 233

The War in Outline 16
The Scarlet Letter 93
Four Plays by 223
A Farewell to Arms 19
The Sun Also Rises 170
Maria Chapdelaine 10

The Ihad j66
The Odyssey 167
The Complete Works of 141
Green Mansions 89

The Purple Land 24
A High Wind in Jamaica 112
The Hunchback of Notre Dame
Antic Hay 209
Point Counter Point 180
A Doll’s House, Ghosts, etc 6
The Portrait of a Lady 107
The Turn of the Screw 169
The Philosophy of William James 114
The Varieties of Religious Experience 70

Roan Stallion, Tamar and Other
Poems 1 18
The Life and Selected Writings oi 234
Dubliners 124

A Portrait of the Artist as a Y->an‘/
Man 145

KAUFMAN AND HART
KUPRIN, ALEXANDRE
LARDNER, RING
LAWRENCE, D H
LAWRENCE, D H
LAWRENCE, D H,
LEWIS, SINCLAIR
LEWIS, SINCLAIR

LONGFELLOW, HENRY W
LOUYS, PIERRE
LUDWIG, EMIL
MACHIAVELLI

Six Plays by 233

Yama 203
The Collected Short Stones of 211
The Rainbow 128
Sons and Lovers 1^9
Women in Love 68
Arrowsmith 42
Babbitt 1 6a

Poems 56
Aphrodite 77

Napoleon 95

The Prince and The Discourses of
Machiavelli 65

MALRAUX, ANDR6
MANN, THOMAS

Man’s Fate 33
Death m Venice

MANSFIELD, KATHERINE
MARQUAND, JOHN P

(In Collected German Stones 108)
The Garden Party 129
The Late George Apley 182

MARX, KARL
MAUGHAM, W SOMERSET
MAUGHAM, W SOMERSET
MAUPASSANT, GUY DE

Capital and Other Writings 202

Of Human Bondage 176*^
The Moon and Sixpence 27
Best Short Stones 98

MAUROIS, ANDrS
McFEE, WILLIAM
MELVILLE, HERMAN

Moby Dick 119

MEREDITH, GEORGE
MEREDITH, GEORGE
MEREJKOWSKI, DMITRI
MILTON, JOHN

The Ordeal of Richard Feverel 134
The Romance ofLeonauio da Vmci 138
The Complete Poetry and Selected

MISCELLANEOUS

An Anthology of American Negro

Disraeli 46

Casuals of the Sea 195

Diana of the Crossways I4

Prose of John Milton 132
Literature 163

An Anthology of Light Verse 48
Best Amer Humorous Short Stones 87
Best Russian Short Stones, including
Bunin's The Gentleman from San
Francisco 18
Eight Famous Elizabethan Plays 94
Famous Ghost Stones 73
Five Great Modern Irish Plays 30

Four Famous Greek Plays 158
Fourteen Great Detective Stones 144
Great German Short Novels and
Stones 108
Great Modern Short Stones 168
Outline of Abnormal Psychology 152
Outline of Psychoanalysis 66
The Consolation of Philosophy 226

The Federalist 139
The Making of Man. An Outline of
Anthropology I49

The Making of Society An Outline of
Sociology 183

The Sex Problem in Modern Society 198
The Short Bible 57

MOLIERE
MORLEY, CHRISTOPHER
MORLEY, CHRISTOPHER
NIETZSCHE, FRIEDRICH
NOSTRADAMUS
ODETS, CLIFFORD
O'NEILL, EUGENE

Plays 78

Human Being 74
Parnassus on Wheels 190

Thus Spake Zarathustra 9
Oracles of 81
Six Plays of 67

O'NEILL, EUGENE

The Emperor Jones, Anna Christie and
The Hairy Ape I46
The Long Voyage Home and Seven

PALGRAVE, FRANCIS
PARKER, DOROrHY

The Golden Treasury 232
The Collected Short Stories of Dorothy

Plays of the Sea ill

PASCAL, BLAISE
PATER, WALTER
PATER, WALTER
PAUL, ELLIOT

PEARSON, EDMUND
PEPYS, SAMUEL

PETRONIUS ARBITER
PLATO

Parker 123
Pcnsees and The Provincial Letters 164
The Renaissance 86
Marius the Epicurean 90
The Life and Death of a Spanish
Town 225
Studies
Murder 113
Samuel Pepys’ Diary I03
The Satyncon 156
The Republic 153

m

PLATO

The Philosophy of Plato i8i

POE, EDGAR ALLAN
POLO, MARCO

The Travels of Marco Polo 196

PORTER, KATHERINE ANNE
PREVOST, ANTOINE
PROUST, MARCEL
PROUST, MARCEL
PROUST, MARCEL
PROUST, MARCEL
PROUST, MARCEL
RABELAIS

READS, CHARLES
REED, JOHN
RENAN, ERNEST
ROSTAND, EDMOND
RUSSELL, BERTRAND

SAROYAN, WILLIAM

Schopenhauer
SHAKESPEARE, WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE, WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE, WILLIAM
SHEEAN, VINCENT
SMOLLETT, TOBIAS
SPINOZA
STEINBECK, JOHN
STEINBECK, JOHN
STEINBECK, JOHN
STEINBECK, JOHN

STENDHAL
STERNE, LAURENCE
STOKER, BRAM
STONE, IRVING

STRACHEY, LYTTON
SUETONIUS
SWIFT, JONATHAN

Best Tales 82

Flowering Judas 88

Manon Lescaut 85
Cities of the Plain 220

Swann’s Way 59
The Captive 120

The Guerm antes Way 11$
Within a Budding Grove 172
Gargantua and Pantagraei 4
The Cloister and the Hearth 62
Ten Days that Shook the World 215
The Life of Jesus 140
Cyrano de Bergerac 154
Selected Papers of Bertrand Russell i
The Daring Young Man on the Flying
Trapeze 92
The Philosophy of Schopenhauer 52
The Complete Tragedies of i
The Complete Comedies of 2
The Complete Histones and Poems of
Shakespeare 3
Personal History 32

Humphry Clinker 159
The Philosophy of Spinoza 60
In Dubious Battle 115

Of Mice and Men 29
The Grapes of Wrath 148
Tortilla Flat 216

The Red and the Black 157
Tristram Shandy 147
Dracula 31
Lust for Life ii
Eminent Victorians 212
Lives of the Tv/eive Caesars 1 88
Gulliver’s Travels, A. 1 ale of a Tub, Th Battle of the Books 100

SWINBURNE, CHARLES
SYMONDS, JOHN A
TACITUS
TCHEKOV, ANTON
TCHEKOV, ANTON

Poems 23
The Life of Michelangelo 49
The Complete Works of 222

THACKERAY, WILLIAM
THACKERAY, WILLIAM
THOMPSON, FRANCIS
THOREAU, HENRY DAVID
THUCYDIDES
TOLSTOY, LEO
TOMLINSON, H M

Henry Esmond 80

TROLLOPE, ANTHONY
TURGENEV, IVAN
VAN LOON, HENDRIK W.
VEBLEN, THORSTEIN

Barchester Towers and The Warden 4L
Fathers and Sons 2i
Ancient Man 105
The Theory of the Leisure Class 63

Short Stones 50
Sea Gull, Cherry Orchard, Three Sis
ters, etc

171

Vanity Fair 131
Complete Poems 38
Walden and Other Writings 155
The Complete Writings of 58
Anna Karenina 37
The Sea and the Jungle 99

VIRGIL’S WORKS

Including The Aeneid, Eclogues, and
Georgies 75

VOLTAIRE
WALPOLE, HUGH
WALTON, IZAAK
WEBB, MARY
WELLS, H G
WHARTON, EDITH

Candide 47

WHITMAN, WALT

Fortitude 178

The Compieat Angler 26
Precious Bane 219

Tono Bungay 197
The Age of Innocence 229
Leaves of Grass 97
Dorian Gray, De Profundis 125

WILDE, OSCAR
WILDE, OSCAR
WILDE, OSCAR
WOOLF, VIRGINIA
WOOLF, VIRGINIA

Poems and Fairy Tales 84
The Plays of Oscar Wilde 83
Mrs Dalloway 96
To the Lighthouse 217

WRIGHT, RICHARD

Native Son 221

YEATS, W B
YOUNG, G F

Irish Fairy and Folk Tales 44

ZOLA, EMILE

The Medici 179
Nana 142

ZWEIG, STEFAN

Amok (In Collected German Stones 108)

MODERN LIBRARY GIANTS
A senes offuU-stzed library editions of hooks that formerly
were amtlable only

m cumbersome and expensive sets

THE MODERN LIBRARY GIANTS REPRESENT A
SELECTION OF THE WORLD’S GREATEST BOOKS
Many are illustrated and some of them are over 1200 pages long

G3

TOLSTOY, LEO. War and Peace
BOSWELL, JAMES Life of Samuel Johnson
HUGO. VICTOR Les Miserables

G4.

THE COMPLETE POEMS OF KEATS AND SHELLEY

Gi.
Ga.

G5 PLUTARCH’S LIVES (The Dryden Translation).
G6l GIBBON, EDWARD The Decline and Fall of the Roman
Gj /
Empire (Complete m two volumes).
G8 THE COMPLETE NOVELS OF JANE AUSTEN
G9. YOUNG, G. F. The Medici (Illustrated).
Gio. TWELVE FAMOUS

RESTORATION PLAYS (1660-1820)

(Congreve, Wycherley, Gay, Goldsmith, Sheridan, etc )

Gii. THE ESSAYS OF MONTAIGNE (The Flono Translation).

MOST POPULAR NOVELS OF SIR WALTER
SCOTT (Quentin Durward, Ivanhoe, and Kenilworth).

Gi2. the

G13 CARLYLE,

THOMAS The French Revolution (Illustrated).

BULFINCH’S MYTHOLOGY (Illustrated)
G15. CERVANTES. Don Quixote (Illustrated).
G16. WOLFE, THOMAS. Look Homeward, Angel

G14.

AND PLAYS OF ROBERT BROWNING
ELEVEN PLAYS OF HENRIK IBSEN.
THE COMPLETE WORKS OF HOMER
THE LIFE AND WRITINGS OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN.
SIXTEEN FAMOUS AMERICAN PLAYS
G22. CLAUSEWITZ, KARL VON. On War.
G23 TOLSTOY, LEO Anna Karenina
Ga4 LAMB, CHARLES The Complete Works and Letters of

G17. THE POEMS

G18
Gig
Gao
G21

Charles Lamb.

AND SULLIVAN
MARX, KARL Capital.
G27. DARWIN, CHARLES, The Origin of Species and The Descent
G25. THE COMPLETE PLAYS OF GILBERT

G26

of Man.

THE COMPLETE WORKS OF LEWIS CARROLL.
H The Conquest of Mexico and

Ga8.
G29. PRESCOTT, WILLIAM
The Conquest of Peru.

G30. MYERS.

GUSTAVUS

History

of

the

Great

American

Fortunes.

G31. WERFEL, FRANZ

G3 s'.

The Forty Days of Musa Dagh

smith, ADAM The Wealth of Nations.
TheMoonstoneandTheWomanin White.

Gw' COLLINS. WILKIE
FRIEDRICH The Philosophy of Nietzsche.
G34. NIETZSCHE,
Greece
G35. BURY, J B A History of
FYODOR The Brothers Karamazov.
G-iS. DOSTOYEVSKY.
NOVELS AND SELECTED TALES OF
G37. THE COMPLETE

NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE.
Jean-Chnstophe.
G18 ROLLAND, ROMAIN
OF SIGMUND FREUD
WRITINGS
BASIC
THE
Gzo
AND POEMS OF EDGAR
TALES
G40 THE COMPLETE
ALLAN POE
JAMES T Studs Lonigan.
FARRELL,
G4I.
TENNYSON
G4a THE POEMS AND PLAYS OF
John
Intelligence in the Modern World.
JOHN
DEWEY,
G43.
Dewey’s Philosophy.
G44. DOS PASSOS, JOHN.

U S. A
Literature

The Story of American
Gat LEWISOHN, LUDWIG
OF MODERN POETRY
G46 A NEW ANTHOLOGY
FROM BACON TO
PHILOSOPHERS
ENGLISH
THE
gIv

MILL.

OPERA GUIDE

G48. THE METROPOLITAN
Tom Sawyer and Huckleberry Finn.
G49. TWAIN,
WHITMAN, WALT. Leaves of Grass

MARK

Gw
G51

THE BEST- KNOWN NOVELS OF GEORGE ELIOT.

052. JOYCE, JAMES

Ulysses

G;3 SUE, EUGENE The Wandering Jew.

Tom Jones
GJ4 fielding, HENRY
Plays by
Nine
EUGENE
O’NEILL.
G55
Shandy and
G56 STERNE, LAURENCE. Tristram

A Senti-

mental Journey
G57. BROOKS, VAN

WYCK The Flowering of New England

G58. MALRAUX, ANDr6 Man’s Hope
Gjq. HEMINGWAY, ERNEST The

Short Stones of

Idiot.
G60 DOSTOYEVSKY, FYODOR. The

(Illustrated

by

Boardman Rcibmson).

A Guide to Great Orchestral Music.
AND PLAYS OF PUSHKIN
PROSE
G6i THE POEMS,
G63. SIXTEEN FAMOUS BRITISH PLAYS
G64 MELVILLE, HERMAN. Moby Dick
G65 THE COMPLETE WORKS OF RABELAIS

G61* SPAETH, SIGMUND

