Mr Pitcairn does not tell us how and when it became clear that the P.O.U.M. possessed scores of machine-guns and several thousand rifles.
I have given an estimate of the arms which were at three of the principal P.O.U.M. buildings--about eighty rifles, a few bombs, and no machine-guns; i.e. about sufficient for the armed guards which, at that time, all the political parties placed on their buildings.
It seems strange that afterwards, when the P.O.U.M. was suppressed and all its
buildings seized, these thousands of weapons never came to light; especially the tanks and field-guns, which are not the kind of thing that can be hidden up the chimney.
But what is revealing in the two statements above is the complete ignorance they display of the local circumstances.
According to Mr Pitcairn the P.O.U.M. stole tanks 'from the barracks'. He does not tell us which barracks.
The P.O.U.M. militiamen who were in Barcelona (now comparatively few, as direct
recruitment to the party militias had ceased) shared the Lenin Barracks with a considerably larger number of Popular Army troops.
Mr Pitcairn is asking us to believe, therefore, that the P.O.U.M. stole tanks with the connivance of the Popular Army.
It is the same with the 'premises' on which the 75-mm. guns were concealed.
There is no mention of where these 'premises' were.
Those batteries of guns, firing on the Plaza de Espana appeared in many newspaper reports, but I think we can say with certainty that they never existed.
As I mentioned earlier, I heard no artillery-fire during the fighting, though the Plaza de Espana was only a mile or so away.
A few days later I examined the Plaza de Espana and could find no buildings that showed marks of shell-fire.
And an eye-witness who was in that neighbourhood throughout the fighting declares that no guns ever appeared there.
(Incidentally, the tale of the stolen guns may have originated with Antonov-Ovseenko, the Russian Consul-General. He, at any rate, communicated it to a well-known English journalist, who afterwards repeated it in good faith in a weekly paper. Antonov-Ovseenko has since been 'purged'. How this would affect his credibility I do not know.)
The truth is, of course, that these tales about tanks, field-guns, and so forth have only been invented because otherwise it is difficult to reconcile the scale of the Barcelona fighting with the P.O.U.M.'s small numbers.
It was necessary to claim that the P.O.U.M. was wholly responsible for the fighting; it was also necessary to claim that it was an insignificant party with no following and 'numbered only a few thousand members', according to _Inprecor_.
The only hope of making both statements credible was to pretend that the P.O.U.M. had all the weapons of a modern mechanized army.
