
THE 42ND PARALLEL

                                                               CONTENTS

       NEWSREEL I It was that emancipated race               3
       The Camera Eye (i) when you walk along
           the street you have to step carefully always            5
MAC                                                                                    6

       The Camera Eye (2) we hurry wallowing
           like in a boat                                                           13
MAC                                                                                  14

        NEWSREEL II Come on and hear                            23

        The Camera Eye (3) O qu^il a des beaux yeux
            said the lady                                                          24
                LOVER OF MANKIND                                      26

        The Camera Eye (4) riding backwards through
            the rain                                                                  28

MAC                                                                                  39

        NEWSREEL III ^‘It takes nerve to live in this
            world”                                                                    54

        The Camera Eye (5) and we played the battle
            of Port Arthur                                                         55

         NEWSREEL IV I met my love in the Alamo             56

        The Camera Eye (6) Go it go it said Mr.
            Linwood                                                                 57

         NEWSREEL V BUGS DRIVE OUT BIOLOGIST      58

 MAC                                                                               . 58

         NEWSREEL VI Paris Shocked At Last                     8o

15
                                                                                            11


       The Camera Eye ( 7) skating on the pond next
           the silver company’s mills                                      8

               THE PLANT WIZARD                                        82

       NEWSREEL VII SAYS THIS IS CENTURY WHERE
           BILLIONS AND BRAINS ARE TO RULE               84

       The Camera Eye (8) you sat on the bed un-
           lacing your shoes                                                   85
MAC                                                                                  86
       The Camera Eye (9) all day the fertilizer-
           factories smelt something awful                             92

               BIG BILL                                                            93

       The Camera Eye (10) the old major who
           used to take me to the Capitol                               96
MAC                                                                                  g8
       NEWSREEL VIII Prof Ferrer, former director of
           the Modern School                                               107

        The Camera Eye ( 1 1 ) the Pennypackers went
           to the Presbyterian church                                   108

        NEWSREEL IX FORFEIT STARS BY DRINKING  IO9
MAC                                                                                no
        The Camera Eye (12) when everybody went
            away for a trip                                                     129

        InEWSREEL X moon’s PATENT IS FIZZLE           I3O

        The Camera Eye (13) he was a towboat cap-
            tain and he knew the river                                   13
JANEY                                                                            133
        The Camera Eye (14) Sunday nights when
            we had fishbails and baked beans                      147
        vl

16
       NEWSREEL XI the government of the United
           States must insist                                                 148
JANEY                                                                            150

       The Camera Eye (15) in the mouth of the
           Schuylkill                                                              166

       NEWSREEL xii Greeks in battle flee before cops 167
               THE BOY ORATOR OF THE
                   PLATTE                                                       169

       The Camera Eye (16)        it was hot as a bake-
            oven going through the canal                              173

J. WARD MOOREHOUSE                                              174
        The Camera Eye (17) the spring you could
           see Halley’s Comet                                              106

        NEWSREEL XIII I was in front of the national
            palace                                                                 208
ELEANOR STODDARD                                                 209
        The Camera Eye (18) she was a very fashion-
            able lady                                                              223
ELEANOR STODDARD                                                  224

        The Camera Eye (19) the methodist min-
            ister’s wife was a tall thin woman                        238

        NEWSREEL XIV BOMBARDIER STOPS AUSTRALIAN 239
                EMPEROR OF THE CARIBBEAN                  241

        The Camera Eye (20) when the streetcarmen
            went out on strike                                                245

J. WARD MOOREHOUSE                                              246

        The Camera Eye (21) that August it never
            rained a drop                                                       260
                                                                                  vii

17
       NEWSREEL XV lights go out as Hcyme Sweet
           Home                                                                    262

               PRINCE OF PEACE                                        264

       The Camera Eye (22) all week the fog clung
           to the sea                                                             265


J. WARD MOOREHOUSE                                              267

       NEWSREEL XVI the Philadelphian had com-
           pleted the thirteenth lap                                       274

        The Camera Eye (23) this friend of mother’s
           was a very lovely                                                  275

ELEANOR STODDARD                                                  276

        The Camera Eye (24) raining in historic
            Quebec       it was raining                                    283

 fANEY                                                                            285
                THE ELECTRICAL WIZARD                           297

        The Camera Eye (25) those spring nights the
            streetcarwheels screech                                     301

        NEWSREEL XVII an attack by a number of hos-
            tile airships                                                          303
MAC                                                                                304
                PROTEUS                                                       325

JANEY                                                                            328

        The Camera Eye (26) the garden was crowded
            and outside                                                         349
        NEWSREEL XVIII Goodby Piccadillyy farewell
            Leicester Square                                                 350

18
                                                                                            1

ELEANOR STODDARD                                                 351

       NEWSREEL XIX U. S. AT WAR                             36

       The Camera Eye (27) there were priests and
           nuns on the Esfagne                                            362
               FIGHTING BOB                                               365
CHARLEY ANDERSON                                                 369

20
                                                                 NEWSREEL 1



                          It was that emancvpated race
                           That was chargin uf the htll
                           Uf to where them msurrectos
                          Was ajighttn fit to kill

           CAPITAL CITY^S CENTURY CLOSED

         General Miles with his gaudy uniform and spirited
charger was the center for all eyes especially as his steed was
extremely restless. Just as the band passed the Commanding
General his horse stood upon his hind legs and was almost
erect. General Miles instantly reined in the frightened animal
and dug in his spurs in an endeavor to control the horse which
to the horror of the spectators, fell over backwards and landed
squarely on the Commanding General. Much to the gratifi-
cation of the people General Miles was not injured but con-
siderable skin was scraped off the flank of the horse. Almost
every inch of General Miles’s overcoat was covered with the
dust of the street and between the shoulders a hole about an
inch in diameter was punctured. Without waiting for anyone
to brush the dust from his garments General Miles remounted
his horse and reviewed the parade as if it were an everyday
occurrence.
        The incident naturally attracted the attention of the
crowd, and this brought to notice the fact that the Command-
ing General never permits a flag to be carried past him with-
out uncovering and remaining so until the colors have past

                     And the Caftenn bold of Comfany B
                      Was afightm in the lead
                      Just kke a trueborn soldier he
                      Of them bullets took no heed

        OFFICIALS KNOW NOTHING OF VICE

         Sanitary trustees turn water of Chicago River into drains
age canal LAKE MICHIGAN SHAKES HANDS WITH
THE FATHER OF THE WATERS German zuchter^

21
rerein singing contest for canary-birds opens the fight for
bimetallism at the ratio of 1 6 to l has not been lost says Bryan

                BRITISH BEATEN AT MAFEKING

        For there^s many a man heen murdered In Luzon

                CLAIMS ISLANDS FOR ALL TIME

        Hamilton Club Listens to Oratory by Ex-Congressman
Posey of Indiana

                  NOISE GREETS NEW CENTURY
               LABOR GREETS NEW CENTURY
        CHURCHES GREET NEW CENTURY

         Mr. McKinley is hard at work in his office when the new
year begins.

            NATION GREETS CENTURY’S DAWN

         Responding to a toast, Hail Columbia^ at the Columbia
Club banquet in Indianapolis, Ind., ex-President Benjamin
Harrison said in part: I have no argument to make here or
anywhere against territorial expansion; but I do not, as some
do, look upon territorial expansion as the safest and most attrac-
tive avenue of national development. By the advantages of
abundant and cheap coal and iron, of an enormous over-
production of food products and of invention and economy in
production, we are now leading by the nose the original and
the greatest of the colonizing nations.
         Society Girls Shocked: Danced with Detectives

         For ihere^s many a man been murdered in Luzon
                                                                                and Mindanao

       GAIETY GIRLS MOBBED IN NEW JERSEY
         One of the lithographs of the leading lady represented her
in less than Atlantic City bathmg costume, sitting on a red-hot
stove; in one hand she held a brimming glass of wine, in the
other ribbons drawn over a pair of rampant lobsters,
          4

22
        For there^s many a man been murdered m Luzon
                                                                   and Mindanao
                                                                                 and In Samaf

        In responding to the toast, ‘^The Twentieth Century,^’
Senator Albert J. Beveridge said m part: The twentieth cefp-
tury will be American. American thought ivill dominate It.
American frogress will give it color and direction. American
deeds will make it illustrious.
        Civilization will never lose its hold on Shanghai. Civiliza-
tion will never defart "from Hongkong. The gates of Peking
will never again he closed to the methods of modern man.
The regeneration of the worldy fhysteal as well as moraly has
beguny and revolutions never move backwards.

         There^s been many a good man murdered in the Philiffine^
        Lies sleefing in some lonesome grave.



                                   THE CAMERA EYE (i)


         when you walk along the street yov have to step

 carefully always on the cobbles so as not to step on the

bright anxious grassblades             easier if you hold Mother^s

 hand and hang on it that way you can kick up your toes

 but walking fast you have to tread on too many grass-

 blades the poor hurt green tongues shrink under your

 feet         maybe thats why those people are so angry and

 follow us shaking their fists                  theyVe throwing stones

 grownup people throwing stones She^s walking fasst and

 we^re running her pointed toes sticking out sharp among

 the poor trodden grassblades under the shaking folds of

23
the brown cloth dress        Englander         a pebble tinkdes

ulong the cobbles

        Quick darling quick in the postcard shop its quiet the

angry people are outside and cant come in           non nem

nicht englander amerikanisch amencain Hoch Amenka

Vive PAmerique She laughs My dear they had me right

frightened

        war on the veldt Kruger Bloemfontein Ladysmith

and Queen Victoria an old lady in a pointed lace cap sent

chocolate to the soldiers at Christmas

        under the counter ids dark and the lady the nice

Dutch lady who loves Americans and has relations in

Trenton shows you postcards that shine in the dark

pretty hotels and palaces O que c^est beau schon

pnttie prittie          and the moonlight ripple ripple under a

bridge and the little reverberes are alight in the dark

 under the counter and the little windows of hotels around

 the harbor O que e’est beau la lune

         and the big moon



                                                                                  MAC


     When the wind set from the silver factories across the
 river the air of the gray fourfamily frame house where
  Fainy McCreary was born was choking all day with the
 smell of whaleoil soap. Other days it smelt of cabbage
 and babies and Mrs. McCreary’s washboilers. Fainy could
          6

24
never play at home because Pop, a lame cavechested man
with a whispy blondegray mustache, was nightwatchman
at the Chadwick Mills and slept all day. It was only round
five o’clock that a curling whiff of tobacco smoke would
seep through from, the front room into the kitchen. That
was a sign that Pop was up and in good spirits, and would
soon be wanting his supper.
    Then Fainy would be sent running out to one of two
corners of the short muddy street of identical frame
houses where they lived.
    To the right it was half a block to Finley’s where he
would have to wait at the bar in a forest of mudsplattered
trouserlegs until all the rank brawling mouths of grown-
ups had been stopped with beers and whiskeys. Then he
would walk home, making each step very carefully, with
the handle of the pail of suds cutting into his hand.
    To the left it was half a block to Maginnis’s Fancy
Groceries, Home and Imported Products. Fainy liked the
cardboard Cream of Wheat darkey in the window, the
glass case with different kinds of salami in it, the barrels
of potatoes and cabbages, the brown smell of sugar, saw-
dust, ginger, kippered herring, ham, vinegar, bread, pep-
per, lard.
    “A loaf of bread, please, mister, a half pound of butter
and a box of ginger snaps.”
    Some evenings, when Mom felt poorly, Fainy had to
                    round the corner past Maginnis’s, down Riv-
go further 3
erside Avenue where the trolley ran, and across the red
bridge over the little river that flowed black between icy
undercut snowbanks in winter, yellow and spuming in the
spring thaws, brown and oily in summer. Across the river

all the way to the corner of Riverside and Main, where
the drugstore was, lived Bohunks and Polaks. Their kids
were always fighting with the kids of the Murphys and
O’Haras and O’Flanagans who lived on Orchard Street.
    Fainy would walk along with his knees quaking, the

                                                                                    7

25
'tnedicine bottle in its white paper tight in one mittened
hand. At the corner of Quince was a group of boys he^d

                                                              it was when he was
have to pass. Passing wasn^t so bad 5
about twenty yards from them that the first snowball
would hum by his ear. There was no comeback. If he
broke into a run, they^d chase him. If he dropped the
^medicine bottle he’d be beaten up when he got home. A
 soft one would plunk on the back of his head and the snow
began to trickle down his neck. When he W'as a half a
block from the bridge he’d take a chance and run for it.

     “Scared cat . . . Shanty Irish . . , Bowlegged Mur-
 phy . . . Running home to tell the cop” . . . would
 yell the Polak and Bohunk kids between snowballs. They
 made their snowballs hard by pouring water on them and
                                                          if one of those hit him
 leaving them to freeze overnight 5
 it drew blood.
     The backyard was the only place you could really feel
 safe to play in. There were brokendown fences, dented
 garbage cans, old pots and pans too nearly sieves to mend,
 a vacant chickencoop that still had feathers and droppings
 on the floor, hogweed in summer, mud in winter^ but the
 glory of the McCrearys’ backyard was Tony Harriman’s
 rabbit hutch, where he kept Belgian hares. Tony Harri-
 man was a consumptive and lived with his mother on the
 ground floor left. He wanted to raise all sorts of other
 small animals too, raccoons, otter, even silver fox, he’d get
 nch that way. The day he died nobody could find the key
 to the big padlock on the door of the rabbit hutch. Fainy
 fed the hares for several days by pushing in cabbage and
 lettuce leaves through the double thickness of chickenwire.
 Then came a week of sleet and rain when he didn’t go out
 in the yard. The first fine day, when he went to look, one
                                                                        he tried to tell
  of the hares was dead. Fainy turned white j
  himself the hare was asleep, but it lay gawkily stiff, not
  asleep. The other hares were huddled in a corner lodking

          8

26
about with twitching noses, their big ears flopping helpless
                                                Fainy wanted to cry. He ran
over their backs. Poor hares j
upstairs to his mother^s kitchen, ducked under the ironing
board and got the hammer out of the drawer in the
kitchen table. The first time he tried he mashed his finger,
but the second time he managed to jump the padlock. In-
side the cage there was a funny, sour smell. Fainy picked
the dead hare up by its ears. Its soft white belly was be-
ginning to pnif up, one dead eye was scaringly open.
Something suddenly got hold of Fainy and made him
drop the hare in the nearest garbage can and run upstairs.
Still cold and trembling, he tiptoed out onto the back
porch and looked down. Breathlessly he watched the other
hares. By cautious hops they were getting near the door
of the hutch into the yard. One of them was out. It sat
up on its hind legs, limp ears suddenly stiff. Mom called
him to bring her a flatiron from the stove. When he got
back to the porch the hares were all gone.
    That winter there was a strike in the Chadwick Mills
and Pop lost his job. He would sit all day in the front
room smoking and cursing:
    ^^Ablebodied man by Jesus, if I couldn^t lick any one
of those damn Polaks with my crutch tied behind my
                                                          I ain’t goin’ to join no
back ... I says so to Mr. Barry ^
strike. Mr. Barry, a sensible quiet man, a bit of an invalid,
with a wife an’ kiddies to think for. Eight years I’ve been
watchman, an’ now you give me the sack to take on a bunch
of thugs from a detective agency. The dirty pugnosed
son of a bitch.”
    ^Tf those damn lousy furreners hadn’t a walked out,”
somebody would answer soothingly.
    The strike was not popular on Orchard Street. It meant
that Mom had to work harder and harder, doing bigger
and bigger boilersful of wash, and that Fainy and his
cdder sister Milly had to help when they came home
from school. And then one day Mom got sick and had to

                                                                                   9

27
go back to bed instead of starting in on the ironing, and
lay with her round white creased face whiter than the pil-
low and her watercreased hands in a knot under her chin.
The doctor came and the district nurse, and all three
rooms of the flat smelt of doctors and nurses and drugs,
and the only place Famy and Milly could find to sit was
on the stairs. There they sat and cried quietly together.
Then Mom^s face on the pillow shrank into a little creased
white thing like a rumpled up handkerchief and they said
that she was dead and took her away.
    The funeral was from the undertaking parlors on River-
side Avenue on the next block. Fainy felt very proud and
important because everybody kissed him and patted his
head and said he was behaving like a little man. He had
a new black suit on, too, like a grownup suit with pockets
and everything, except that it had short pants. There were
all sorts of people at the undertaking parlors he had never
been close to before, Mr. Russell, the butcher and Father
O’Donnell and Uncle Tim O’Hara who’d come on from
Chicago, and it smelt of w'hisky and beer like at Finley’s.
Uncle Tim was a skinny man with a knobbed red face and
 blurry blue eyes. He wore a loose black silk tie that wor-
 ried Fainy, and kept leaning down suddenly, bending
 from the waist as if he was going to close up like a jack-
 knife, and whispering in a thick voice in Fainy’s ear.
     “Don’t you mind ’em, old sport, they’re a bunch o’
 bums and hypocrytes, stewed to the ears most of ’em
 already. Look at Father O’Donnell the fat swine already
 figurin’ up the burial fees. But don’t you mind ’em, re-
 member you’re an O’Hara on your mother’s side. I don’t
 mind ’em, old sport, and she was my own sister by birth
 and blood.”
     When they got home he was terribly sleepy and his feet
 were cold and wet. Nobody paid any attention to him. He
 sat whimpering on the edge of the bed m the dark. In
 the front room there were voices and a sound of knives
          10

28
and rorks, but he didn’t dare go in there. He curled up
against the wall and went to sleep. Light in his eyes woke
him up. Uncle Tim and Pop were standing over him talk-
ing loud. They looked funny and didn’t seem to be stand-
ing veiy steady. Uncle Tim held the lamp.
    ^^Weil, Famy, old sport,’" said Uncle Tim giving the
lamp a perilous wave over Fainy’s head. ^Tenian O’Hara
McCreary, sit up and take notice and tell us what you
think of our proposed removal to the great and growing
city of Chicago. Middletown’s a terrible bitch of a dump
if you ask me .      .  . Meanin’ no oiEfense, John . .    . But
Chicago .   . . Jesus God, man, when you get there you’ll
chink you’ve been dead and nailed up in a coffin all these
years.”
    Fainy was scared. He drew his knees up to his chin and
looked tremblingly at the two big swaying figures of men
 lit by the swaying lamp. He tried to speak but the words
dried up on his lips.
    ^^The kid’s asleep, Tim, for all your speechifyin’ .       .  .
Take your clothes off, Fainy, and get into bed and get a
 good night’s sleep. We’re leavin’ in the mornin’.”
    And late on a rainy morning, without any breakfast,
 with a big old swelltop trunk tied up with rope joggling
 perilously on the roof of the cab that Fainy had been sent
 to order from Hodgeson’s Livery Stable, they set out.
 Milly was crying. Pop didn’t say a word but sucked on
 an unlit pipe. Uncle Tim handled everything, making

 little jokes all the time that nobody laughed at, pulling
 a roll of bills out of his pocket at every juncture, or taking
 great gurgling sips out of the flask he had in his pocket.
 Milly cried and cried. Fainy looked out with big dry eyes

 at the familiar streets, all suddenly odd and lopsided, that

 rolled past the cabj the red bridge, the scabshingled
 houses where the Polaks lived, Smith’s and Smith’s cor-

 ner drugstore . . . there was Billy Hogan just coming

                                                                                  II

29
out with a package of chewing gum in his hand. Playing
hookey again. Fainy had an impulse to yell at him, but
something froze it . . . Main with its elms and street

cars, blocks of stores round the corner of Church, and
then the fire department. Fainy looked for the last time
into the dark cave where shone entrancingly the brass and
copper curves of the engine, then past the cardboard fronts
of the First Congregational Church, The Carmel Baptist
Church, St. Andrew^s Episcopal Church built of brick and
set catercornered on its lot instead of straight with a stern
face to the street like the other churches, then the three
castiron stags on the lawn in front of the Commercial
House, and the residences, each with its lawn, each with

its scrollsaw porch, each with its hydrangea bush. Then
the houses got smaller, and the lawns disappeared^ the
cab trundled round past Simpson^s Grain and Feed Ware-
house, along a row of barbershops, saloons and lunch-
rooms, and they were all getting out at the station.
    At the station lunchcounter Uncle Tim set everybody
up to breakfast. He dried Milly’s tears and blew Fainy’s
nose in a big new pockethandkerchief that stJl had the tag
on the corner and set them to work on bacon and eggs and
coffee. Fainy hadn^t had coffee before, so the idea of sit-
ting up like a man and drinking coffee made him feel
pretty good. Milly didn^t like hers, said it was bitter.
They were left all alone in the lunchroom for sometime
with the empty plates and empty coffee cups under the
beady eyes of a woman with the long neck and pointed
face of a hen who looked at them disapprovingly from
behind the counter. Then with an enormous, shattering
                                                     puff, the train came into
rumble, sludgepuff sludge . . .
the station. They were scooped up and dragged across
the platform and through a pipesmoky car and before
they knew it the train was moving and the wintry russet
Connecticut landscape was clattermg by.

30
                                THE CAMERA EYE (2)


        we hurry wallowing like in a boat in the musty

stablysmellmg herdic cab He kept saying What would

you do Lucy if I were to invite one of them to my table f*

TheyVe very lovely people Lucy the colored people and
He had cloves in a little silver box and a rye whisky smeli

on his breath hurrying to catch the cars to New York

        and She was saying Oh dolly I hope we wont be

late and Scott was waiting with the tickets and we had to

run up the platform of the Seventh Street Depot and all

the little cannons kept falling out of the Olympia and

everybody stooped to pick them up and the conductor

Allaboard lady quick lady

        they were little brass cannons and were bright in the

sun on the platform of the Seventh Street Depot and Scott

hoisted us all up and the train was moving and the engine

bell was ringing and Scott put in your hand a little handful

of brass tiny cannons just big enough to hold the smallest

size red firecracker at the battle of Manila Bay and said

Kerens the artillery Jack

        and He was holding forth in the parlor car Why
Lucy if it were necessary for the cause of humanity I

would walk out and be shot any day you would Jack

wouldn’t you? wouldn’t you porter? who was bringing

appolinaris and He had a flask in the brown grip where

31
the silk initialed handkerchiefs always smelt of bay rurn

       and when we got to Havre de Grace He said Re-

member Lucy we used to have to ferry across the Susque-

hanna before the bridge was built

        and across Gunpowder Creek too



                                                                                  MAC


    Russet hills, patches of woods, farmhouses, cows, a red

colt kicking up its heels in a pasture, rail fences, streaks
of marsh.
    “Well, Tim, I feel like a whipped cur . . . So long as
 [Ve lived, Tim, IVe tried to do the right thing, Pop
kept repeating in a rattling voice. “And now what can they
be asayin^ about me?”
    “Jesus God, man, there was nothin^ else you could do,
was there? What the devil can you do if you haven’t any
money and haven’t any job and a lot o’ doctors and under-
 takers and landlords come round with their bills and you
 with two children to support?”
     “But I’ve been a quiet and respectable man, steady and
 misfortunate ever since I married and settled down. And
 now what’ll they be thinkin’ of me sneakin’ out like a
 whipped cur?”
     “John, take it from me that I’d be the last one to want
 to bring disrespect on the dead that was my own sister by
 birth and blood , . . But it ain’t your fault and it ain’t
 my fault . .     . it’s the fault of poverty, and poverty’s the
 fault of the system . . . Fenian, you listen to Tim
 O’Hara for a minute and Milly you listen too, cause a
 girl ought to know these things just as well as a man and

32
for once in his life Tim O’Hara’s tellin’ the truth . .

It’s the fault of the system that don’t give a man the fruit
of his labor , . . The only man that gets anything out of
capitalism is a crook, an’ he gets to be a millionaire in
short order . . . But an honest workin’ man like John or
muself we can work a hundred years and not leave enough
to bury us decent with.”
    Smoke rolled white in front of the window shaking out
of its folds trees and telegraph poles and little square
shingleroofed houses and towns and trolleycars, and long
rows of buggies with steaming horses standing in line.
    “And who gets the fruit of our labor, the goddam busi-
ness men, agents, middlemen who never did a productive
 piece of work in their life.”
    Fainy’s eyes are following the telegraph wires that sag
 and soar.
     “Now, Chicago ain’t no paradise, I can promise you
 that, John, but it’s a better market for a workin’ man’s
 muscle and brains at present than the East is . . . And
 why, did you ask me why , . . ? Supply and demand,
 they need workers in Chicago.”
     “Tim, I tellyer I feel like a whipped cur.”

     “It’s the system, John, it’s the goddam lousy system.”
     A great bustle in the car woke Fainy up. It was dark.
 Milly was crying again. He didn’t know where he was«
     ^Well, gentlemen,” Uncle Tim was saying, “we’re
 about to arrive in little old New York.”
                                                    that surprised Fainy, who
     In the station it was light 5
 thought it was already night. He and Milly were left a

 long time sitting on a suitcase in the waitingroom. The
 waitingroom was huge, full of unfamiliarlooking people,

 scary like people in picturebooks. Milly kept crying.
     “Hey, Milly, I’ll biff you one if you don’t stop crying.”
     ‘Why?” whined Milly, crying all the more.
     Fainy stood as far away from her as possible so that

  people wouldn’t think they were together. When he was

                                                                                  X5

33
about ready to cry himself Pop and Uncle Tim came and
took them and the suitcase into the restaurant. A strong
smell of fresh whisky came from their breaths, and they
seemed very bright around the eyes. They all sat at a table
with a white cloth and a sympathetic colored man in a
white coat handed them a large card full of printing.
    ^^Leds eat a good supper,” said Uncle Tim, ^bf ids the

last thing we do on this earth.”
    ‘^‘Damn the expense,” said Pop, ^bds the system thads
to blame.”
    ^^To hell with the pope,” said Uncle Tim. “Well make
a social-democrat out of you yet.”
    They gave Fainy fried oysters and chicken and ice-
cream and cake, and when they all had to run for the train
he had a terrible stitch in his side. They got into a day-
coach that smelt of coalgas and armpits. “When are wc
going to bed?” Milly began to whine. “We’re not going
to bed,” said Uncle Tim airily. “We’re going to sleep
right here like little mice .            . . like little mice in a
 cheese.” “I doan like mice,” yelled Milly with a new
 flood of tears as the train started.
                                           in his ears was the continuous
    Fainy’s eyes smarted 5
 roar, the clatter clatter over crossings, the sudden snarl
 under bridges. It was a tunnel, all the way to Chicago it
 was a tunnel. Opposite him Pop’s and Uncle Tim’s faces
 looked red and snarling, he didn’t like the way they
 looked, and the light was smoky and jiggly and outside

 it was all a tunnel and his eyes hurt and wheels and rails
 roared in his ears and he fell asleep.
     When he woke up it was a town and the train was run-
 ning right through the main street. It was a sunny morn-
 ing. He could see people going about their business, stores,
 buggies and spring-wagons standing at the curb, newsboys
 selling newspapers, wooden Indians outside of cigarstores.

  ^lt first he thought he was dreaming, but then he remem-
 bered and dedded it must be Chicago, Pop and Uncle Tim
          16

34
were asleep on the seat opposite. Their mouths were open,
their faces were splotched and he didn’t like the way they
looked. Milly was curled up with a wooly shawl all over
her. The train was slowing down, it was a station. If it was
Chicago they ought to get off. At that moment the con-
ductor passed, an old man who looked a little like Fathei
O’Donnell.
    “Please, mister, is this Chicago?” “Chicago’s a long way
off yet, son,” said the conductor without smiling. “This is
Syracuse.”
    And they all woke up, and for hours and hours the
telephone poles went by, and towns, frame houses, brick
factories with ranks and ranks of glittering windows,
dumping grounds, trainyards, plowed land, pasture, and
cows, and Milly got trainsick and Fainy’s legs felt like
                                                                                      some
they would drop off from sitting in the seat so long 5
places it was snowing and some places it was sunny, and
Milly kept getting sick and smelt dismally of vomit, and

it got dark and they all slept; and light again, and then
the towns and the framehouses and the factories all started
drawing together, humping into warehouses and elevators,
 and the trainyards spread out as far as you could see and

 it was Chicago.
     But it was so cold and the wind blew the dust so hard
 in his face and his eyes were so stuck together by dust and
 tiredness that he couldn’t look ?t anything. After they had
 waited round a long while, Milly and Fainy huddled to-
 gether in the cold, they got on a streetcar and rode and
 rode. They were so sleepy they never knew exactly where'
 the train ended and the streetcar began. Uncle Tim’s voice
 went on talking proudly excitedly, Chicago, Chicago, Chi-

 cago. Pop sat with his chin on his crutch. “Tim, I feel like
 a whipped cur.”
     Fainy lived ten years in Chicago.
     At first he went to school and played baseball on back

 lots on Saturday afternoons, but then came his last com-

                                                                                   17

35
mencement, and all the children sang My Country^ ^Tis
Of Thecy and school was over and he had to go to work.
Uncle Tim at that time had his own jobprinting shop on
a diisty side street off North Clark in the ground floor of
a cranky old brick building. It only occupied a small sec-
tion of the building that was mostly used as a ware-
house and was famous for its rats. It had a single wide
plateglass window made resplendent by gold Old English
lettering: timothy o’hara^ job printer.
    ^^Now, Fainy, old sport,” said Uncle Tim, ^^^u^ll have
a chance to learn the profession from the ground up.” So
he ran errands, delivered packages of circulars, throw-
aways, posters, was always dodging trolleycars, ducking
from under the foamy bits of big truckhorses, bumming
rides on deliverywagons. When there were no errands to
run he swept out under the presses, cleaned type, emptied
the ofEce wastepaper basket, or, during rush times, ran
round the corner for coffee and sandwiches for the type-
setter, or for a small flask of bourbon for Uncle Tim.
    Pop puttered round on his crutch for several years,
always looking for a job. Evenings he smoked his pipe
and cursed his luck on the back stoop of Uncle Tim’s
 house and occasionally threatened to go back to Middle-
 town. Then one day he got pneumonia and died quietly
 at the Sacred Heart Hospital. It was about the same time
 that Uncle Tim bought a linotype machine.
     Uncle Tim was so excited he didn’t take a drink for
 three days. The floorboards were so rotten they had to
 build a brick base for the linotype all the way up from
 the cellar. ^^Well, when we get another one we’ll concrete
 the whole place,” Uncle Tim told everybody. For a whole
 day there was no work done. Everybody stood around
 looking at the tall black intricate machine that stood there
 like an organ in a church. When the machine was work-
 ing and the printshop filled with the hot smell of molten
 metal, everybody’s eyes followed the quivering inquisitive

36
arm that darted and flexed above the keyboard. Wien
they handed round the warm shiny slugs of type the old
German typesetter who for some reason they called Mike
pushed bade his glasses on his forehead and cried, ‘^Fifty-
five years a printer, and now when Pm old PU have tc
carry hods to make a living,^^
    The first print Uncle Tim set up on the new machine
was the phrase: Workers of the world unite you have
                                                                           j
nothing to lose but your chains.
    When Fainy was seventeen and just beginning to worrj^
about skirts and ankles and girls^ underwear when he
walked home from work in the evening and saw the lights
of the city bright against the bright heady western sky,
there was a strike in the Chicago printing trades, Tim
O^Hara had always run a union shop and did all the union
printing at cost. He even got up a handbill signed, A Citi-
zen, entitled An Ernest Protest, which Fainy was allowed
to set up on the linotype one evening after the operator
had gone home. One phrase stuck in Fainy’s mind, and
he repeated it to himself after he had gone to' bed that
night: It is time for all honest men to band together To
resist the ravages of greedy privilege.
    The next day was Sunday, and Fainy went along
Michigan Avenue with a package of the handbills to dis-
tribute. It was a day of premature spring. Across the rot-
ting yellow ice on the lake came little breezes that smelt
unexpectedly of flowers. The girls looked terribly pretty
and their skirts blew in the wind and Fainy felt the spring
blood pumping hot in him, he wanted to kiss and to roll
on the ground and to run out across the icecakes and to
make speeches from the tops of telegraph poles and to
vault over trolleycarsj but instead he distributed hand-

bills and worried about his pants being frayed and wished
he had a swell looking suit and a swell looking girl to
walk with.
    ^Hey, young* feller, where’s, your permit to distribute

                                                                                  i‘9

37
them handbills?” It was a cop’s voice growling in his ear.
Fainy gave the cop one look over his shoulder, dropped
the handbills and ran. He ducked through between the
shiny black cabs and carriages, ran down a side street and
walked and walked and didn’t look back untd he managed
to get across a bridge just before the draw opened. The
cop wasn’t following him anyway.
    He stood on the curb a long time with the whistle of
a peanutstand shrilling derisively in his ear.
    That night at supper his uncle asked him about the
handbills.
    “Sure I gave ’em out all along the lakeshore ... A
cop tried to stop me but I told him right where to get
off..” Fainy turned burning red when a hoot went up from
everybody at the table. He filled up his mouth with
mashed potato and wouldn’t say any more. His aunt and
his uncle and their three daughters all laughed and
laughed. “Well, it’s a good thing you ran faster than the
cop,” said Uncle Tim, “else I should have had to bail you
out and that would have cost money.”
   The next morning early Fainy was sweeping .out the
office, when a man with a face like a raw steak walked up
                  he was smoking a thin black stogy of a sort
the steps 5
Fainy had never seen before. He knocked on the ground
glass door.                                                              ,
    “I want to speak to Mr. O’Hara, Timothy O’Hara.”
  ’ “He’s not here yet, be fiere any .minute now, sir; Will
you Wait?”                               '

    “You bet I’ll wait.” The man' sat on the edge            ' of a
chair ' and spat, first taking the chewed end of the stogy
out of his mputh ami looking' at it meditatively" for a long
time. When Tim O’Hara came the office door closed with
a bang. Fainy hovferesi nervously around, a little bitiafraidi
the man might be a detective following up the affair of
the handbills. Voices rose and fell, the stranger’s ivoice in
         rattling tirade?, OTJara’s voice ia iong expostulating

38
clauses, now and then Fainy caught the word forecloscj
until suddenly the door flew open and the stranger shot
out, his face purpler than even On the iron stoop he
turned and pulling a new stogy from his pocket, lit it from
                      growling the words through the stogy and
the old one 5
the blue puff of smoke, he said, ^^Mn O’Hara, you have
twenty-four hours to think it over ... A word from you
and proceedings stop immediately.” Then he went off
down the street leaving behind him a long trail of rancid
smoke.
    A minute later. Uncle Tim came out of the office, his
face white as paper. ^Tenian, old sport,” he said, ^^you
go get yourself a job. I’m going out of business . . .
Keep a weather eye open. Pm going to have a drink.”
And he was drunk for six days. By the end of that time
a number of meeklooking men appeared with summonses,
and Uncle Tim had to sober up enough to go down to the
court and put in a plea of bankruptcy.
    Mrs. O’Hara scolded and stormed, ^^Didn’t I tell you,
Tim O’Hara, no good’ll ever come with your fiddlin’
round with these godless labor unions and social-democrats
and knights of labor, all of ’em drunk and loafin’ bums
like yourself, Tim O’Hara. Of course the master printers
ud have to get together and buy up your outstandin’
paper and squash you, and serve you right too, Tim
O’Hara, you and your godless socialistic boosin’ ways only
they might have thought of your poor wife and her help-^

less wee babes, and now we’ll starve all of us together, m
and the dependents and hangers on you’ve brought into
the house.”
    ^Well, I declare,” cried Fainy’s sister Milly. ^Tf I
haven’t slaved and worked my fingers to the bone for
every piece of bread I’ve eaten in this house,” and she
got up from the breakfast table and flounced out of the
room. Fainy ' sat there while the storm raged above his
headj then he got up, slipping a corn muffin into his

39
pocket as he went. In the hall he found the ^^help wanted^’
section of the Chicago Tribune^ took his cap and went out
into a raw Sunday morning full of churchbells jangling
in his ears. He boarded a streetcar and went out to Lin-
coln Park. There he sat on a bench for a long time munch-
ing the muffin and looking down the columns of adver-
tisements: Boy Wanted. But they none of them looked
very inviting. One thing he was bound, he wouldn^t get
another job in a printing shop until the strike was over.
Then his eye struck

    Bright boy wanted with amb. and lit. taste, knowledge
of print, and pub. business. Conf. sales and distrib. propo-
sition $15 a week apply by letter P.O. Box 1256b

    Fainy’s head suddenly got very light. Bright boy, that^s
me, ambition and literary taste . . , Gee, I must finish
hooking Backward . . . and jez, I like reading fine,
an’ I could run a linotype or set up print if anybody’d let
me. Fifteen bucks a week . .       . pretty soft, ten dollars’
raise. And he began to write a letter in his head, apply-
ing for the job.

Dear Sir (My dear sir)
    or maybe Gentlemen,
        In applying for the position you offer in today’s
Sunday Tribune I want to apply, (allow me to state) that
Pm seventeen years old, no, nineteen, with several years’
experience in the printing and publishing trades, ambitious
and with excellent knowledge and taste in the printing and
publishing trades,

    no, I can’t say that twice . . . And I’m very anxious
 for the job ... As he went along it got more and more
muddled in his head.
    He found he was standing beside a peanut wagon. It
 was cold as blazes, a razor wind was shrieking across the
 broken ice and the black patches of water of the lake. He
         22

40
tore out the ad and let the rest of the paper go with thi
wind. Then he bought himself a warm package of peanuts.



                                                              NEWSREEL II


                                    Come on and hear
                                    Come on and hear
                                    Come on and hear

        In his address to the Michigan state Legislature the retir-
ing governor, Hazen S. Pingree, said in part: I make the pre-
diction that unless those in charge and in whose hands legisla-
tion is reposed do not change the present system of inequality,
there will be a bloody revolution in less than a quarter of a
century in this great country of ours,

           CARNEGIE TALKS OF HIS EPITAPH

                              Alexander's Ragtime Band
                              It ts the best
                              It is the best

        the luncheon which was served in the physical laboratory
was replete with novel features. A miniature blastfurnace four
feet high was on the banquet table and a narrow gauge rail-
road forty feet long ran round the edge of the table. Instead
of molten metal the blastfurnace poured hot punch into small

cars on the railroad. Icecream was served in the shape of rail-

road ties and bread took the shape of locomotives.
         Mr. Carnegie, while extolling the advantages of higher

education in every branch of learning, came at last to this con-

clusion . Manual labor has been found to be the best foundation

for the greatest work of the brain.

           VICE PRESIDENT EMPTIES A BANK

                              Come on and hear
                              Alexander's Ragtime Band
                                                                                          H

41
                                          It is the best
                                          It is the best

        brother of Jesse James declares play picturing him as
bandit trainrobber and outlaw is demoralizing district battle
ends with polygamy, according to an investigation by Salt Lake
ministers, still practiced by Mormons clubwomen gasp

                              It is the best band m the land

        say circus animals only eat Chicago horsemeat Taxsale of
Indiana lots marks finale of World’s Fair boom uses flag as
ragbag killed on cannibal isle keeper falls into water and sea-
lions attack him.

        The launch then came alongside the half deflated balloon
of the aerostat which threatened at any moment to smother
Santos Dumont. The latter was half pulled and half clam-
bered over the gunwale into the boat.
         The prince of Monaco urged him to allow himself to be
taken on board the yacht to dry himself and change his clothes.
Santos Dumont would not leave the launch until everything
that could be saved had been taken ashore, then, wet but
smiling and unconcerned, he landed amid the frenzied cheers
of the crowd.


                                    THE CAMERA EYE (3)


          O qu^il a des beaux yeux said the lady in the seat

 opposite but She said that was no way to talk to children

 and the little boy felt all hot and sticky but it was dusk

 and the lamp shaped like half a melon was coming on

 dim red and the train rumbled and suddenly IVe been

 asleep and ifs black dark and the blue tassel bobs on the

 iftdge of the dark shade shaped like a melon and every-

42
where there are pointed curved shadows (the first timv.
He came He brought a melon and the sun was coming in

through the tall lace windowcurtains and when We cut it

the smell of melons filled the whole room) No don’t eat

the seeds deary they give you appendicitis

       but youYe peeking out of the window into the blacls

rumbling dark suddenly ranked with squat chimneys and

you’re scared of the black smoke and the puffs of flame

that flare and fade out of the squat chimneys        Potterie?

dearie they work there all night Who works there all

night? Workingmen and people like that laborers travail-

leurs greasers

        you were scared

        but now the dark was all black again the lamp in thd

train and the sky and everything had a blueblack shade

on it and She was telling a story about

        Longago Beforetheworldsfair Beforeyouwereborn and

they went to Mexico on a private car on the new interna-

tional line and the men shot antelope off the back of the

train and big rabbits jackasses they called them and once

one night Longago Beforetheworldsfair Beforeyouwereborn

one night Mother was so frightened on account of all the

rifleshots but it was allright turned out to be nothing but

a little shooting they’d been only shooting a greaser that

was all

        that was in the early days

                                                                                 25

43
                              LOVER OF MANKIND


       Debs was a railroad man, born in a weather-
boarded shack at Terre Haute.
       He was one of ten children.
       His father had come to America in a sailingship
in ’49,
                                                  not much of a money-
       an Alsatian from Colmar j
maker, fond of music and reading,
       he gave his children a chance to finish public
school and that was about all he could do.
       At fifteen Gene Debs was already working as a
machinist on the Indianapolis and Terre Haute Rail-
way.
        He worked as locomotive fireman,
        clerked in a store
        joined the local of the Brotherhood of L,ocomo-
tive Firemen, was elected secretary, traveled all over
the country as organizer.
        He was a tall shamblefooted man, had a sort of
gusty rhetoric that set on fire the railroad workers in
their pineboarded halls
        made them want the world he wanted,
        a world brothers might own
        where everybody would split even:
        7 am not a labor leader. I don^t want you to fol-
 low me or anyone else. If you are looking for a Moses
 to lead you out of the captalist wilderness you will stay
 right where you are. I would not lead you into this
 promised land if I could, because if I could lead you
 m, someone else would lead you out.
        That was how he talked to freighthandlers and
 gandywalkers, to firemen and switchmen and engi-
 neers, telling them it wasn’t enough to organize the
 railroadmen, that all workers must be organized, that

44
all workers must be organized in the workers’ coopera^
tive commonwealth.
       Locomotive fireman on many a long night’s run,
       under the smoke a fire burned him up, burned in
                                                                     he wanted
gusty words that beat in pineboarded halls j
his brothers to be free men.
       That was what he saw in the crowd that met him
at the Old Wells Street Depot when he came out of
jail after the Pullman strike,
       those were the men that chalked up nine hundred
thousand votes for him in nineteen twelve and scared
the frockcoats and the tophats and diamonded hostesses
at Saratoga Springs, Bar Harbor, Lake Geneva with
the bogy of a socialist president.


        But where were Gene Debs’ brothers in nineteen
eighteen when Woodrow Wilson had him locked up
in Atlanta for speaking against war,
        where were the big men fond of whisky and fond
of each other, gentle rambling tellers of stories over
bars in small towns in the Middle West,
        quiet men who wanted a house with a porch to
putter around and a fat wife to cook for them, a fe's^
drinks and cigars, a garden to dig in, cronies to chew
the rag with
        and wanted to work for it
        and others to work for it;
        where were the locomotive firemen and engineers
 when they hustled him ofF to Atlanta Penitentiary?


        And they brought him back to die in Terre Haute
        to sit on his porch in a rocker with a dgar in kk
 mouth.

45
       beside him American Beauty roses his wife fixed
in a bowlj
       and the people of Terre Haute and the people in
Indiana and the people of the Middle West were fond
of him and afraid of him and thought of him as an old
kindly uncle who loved them, and wanted to be with
him and to have him give them candy,
        but they were afraid of him as if he had contracted
a social disease, syphilis or leprosy, and thought it was
too bad,
        but on account of the flag
        and prosperity
        and making the world safe for democracy,
        they were afraid to be with him,
        or to think much about him for fear they might
6elieve him;
        for he said:
        While there is a lower class I am of it, while there

 is a criminal class I am of ity while there is a soul in
 prison I am not free.


                              THE CAMERA EYE (4.)


        riding backwards through the rain in the rumbly cab

 looking at their two faces in the jiggly light of the four*

 wheeled cab and Her big trunks thumping on the roof

  \nd He reciting Othello in his lawyer’s voice                /

       Her father loved me, oft invited me

     ' Still questioned me the story of my life
       From year to year^ the battles^ sieges^ fortunes

         28

46
      That 1 have fast.

      1 ran it through, even from my boyish days.

      To th’ very moment that he bade me tell it

      Wherein 1 sfoke of the most disastrous chances

      Of moving accidents by flood and field

      Of hairbreadth ’scafes ? thd imminent deadly breach

       why that’s the Schuylkill           the horse’s hoofs rattle

sharp on smooth wet asphalt after cobbles       through the

gray streaks of rain the river shimmers ruddy with winter
mud When I was your age Jack I dove off this bridge

through the rail of the bridge we can look way dow»

into the cold rainyshimmery water Did you have any

clothes on?        Just my shirt


                                                                                 MAC


    Fainy stood near the door in the crowded elevated
train; against the back of the fat man who held on to the
strap in front of him, he kept rereading a letter on crisp
watermarked stationery:

The Truthseeker Literary Distributing Co., Inc.
    General OfHces 1104 S. Hamlin Avenue
        Chicago, 111. April 14, 1904
 Fenian O’H. McCreary
    456 N, Wood Street
         Chicago, 111.
 Dear Sir:
     We take the pleasure to acknowledge yours of th*

 loth inst.

47
    In reference to the matter in hand we feel that much
could be gained by a personal interview. If you will be so
good as to step around to the above address on Monday
April 1 6th at nine o’clock, we feel that the matter of your
adaptability for the position for which you have applied
can be thoroughly thrashed out.
    Yours in search for Truth,
                                      Emmanuel R. Bingham, D.D.

    Fainy was scared. The train got to his station too soon.
He had fifteen minutes to walk two blocks in. He loafed
along the street, looking in store windows. There was a
golden pheasant, stuffed, in a taxidermist’s; above it hung
a big flat greenish fish with a sawtoothed bill from which
dangled a label:

                      SAWFISH (fristis -perrotetti)

    Habitat Gulj and Florida waters. Frequents shallow
bays and inlets.

    Maybe he wouldn’t go at all. In the back of the window
was a lynx and on the other side a bobtailed cat, each on
its limb of a tree. Suddenly he caught his breath. He’d be
late. He went tearing off down the block.
    He was breathless and his heart was pounding to beat
the cars when he reached the top of the fourth flight of
stairs. He studied the groundglass doors on the landing;

        THE UNIVERSAL CONTACT COMPANY
                                    F. W. Perkins
                                        Assurance

     THE WINDY CITY MAGIC AND NOVELTY
                                     COMPANY

                                       Dr. Noble

                      Hospital and Sickroom Supplies
         30

48
   The last one was a grimy door in the back beside thft
toilet. The goldleaf had come oflF the letters, but he was
able to spell out from the outlines:

    THE GENERAL OUTFITTING AND MER-
                 CHANTIZING CORPORATION
    Then he saw a card on the wall beside the door with
a hand holding a torch drawn out on it and under it the
words “Truthseeker Inc.” He tapped gingerly on the
glass. No answer. He tapped again.
    “Come In . . . Don’t knock,” called out a deep voice.
Falny found himself stuttering as he opened the door and
stepped into a dark, narrow room completely filled up by
two huge rolltop desks:
    “Please, I called to see Mr. Bingham, sir.”
    At the further desk, in front of the single window sat
a big man with a big drooping jaw that gave him a little
of the expression of a setter dog. His black hair was long
and curled a little over each ear, on the back of his head
was a broad black felt hat. He leaned back in his chair and
looked Falny up and down.
    “How do you do, young man? What kind of books arc
you inclined to purchase this morning? What can I do for
you this morning?” he boomed.
    “Are you Mr. Bingham, sir, please?”
    “This is Doc Bingham right here before you.”
    “Please, sir, I ... I came about that job.”
    Doc Bingham’s expression changed. He twisted his
mouth as If he’d just tasted something sour. He spun
round in his swivelchair and spat into a brass spittoon in

the corner of the room. Then he turned to Fainy again
and leveled a fat finger at him, “Young man, how do you
spell experience?”
     “E .    .  . X . .     . p . . . er . . . er . . . er . . . i

 * . . a . . . n . . .”

     “That’ll do       , . . No education ... I thought

49
much  . . No culture, none of those finer feelings that
distinguish the civilized man from the savage aborigines
of the wilds . . . No enthusiasm for truth, for bringing
light into dark places . . . Do you realize, young man,
that it is not a job Pm offering you, it is a great oppor-
tunity ... a splendid opportunity for service and self-
improvement. I^m offering you an education gratis.’’
    Fainy shuiEHed his feet. He had a husk in his throat.

    ^‘^If It’s in the printin’ line I guess I could do it.”
    “Well, young man, during the brief interrogatory
through which I’m going to put you, remember that you
stand on the threshold of opportunity.”
    Doc Bingham ferreted in the pigeonholes of his desk
for a long time, found himself a cigar, bit off the end, lit

it, and then turned again to Fainy, who was standing first
on one foot and then on the other
    “Well, if you’ll tell me your name.”
    “Fenian O’Hara McCreary . . .”
    “Hum . . . Scotch and Irish . .            . that’s pretty good
 ^ock . . . that’s the stock I come from.”
    “Religion?”
    “Fainy squirmed. “Pop was a Catholic but . . He
 iurned red.
    Dr. Bingham laughed, and rubbed his hands.
    “Oh, religion, what crimes are committed in thy name.
 I’m an agnostic myself . . . caring nothing for class or
                                                though sometimes, my boy,
creed when among friends 5
you have to bow with the wind ... No, sir, my God is
the truth, that rising ever higher in the hands of honest
men will dispel the mists of ignorance and greed, and
 bring freedom and knowledge to mankind . . . Do you
 agree with me?”
     “I’ve been working for my uncle. He’s a social-
democrat.”
     “Ah, hotheaded youth . . . Can you drive a horse?”
     “Why, yessir, I guess I could.”

         3 ^^

50
    ^^Well, I don^t see why I shouldn't hire you.”
    ^^The advertisement in the Tribune said fifteen dollars
a week.”
    Doc Bingham^s voice assumed a particularly velvety
tone.
    ^Why, Fenian my boy, fifteen dollars a week will be
the minimum you will make . . . Have you ever heard
of the cooperative system? That is how Pm going to hire
you ... As sole owner and representative of the Truth-
'eeker Corporation, I have here a magnificent line of
^mall books and pamphlets covering every phase of human
knowledge and endeavor ... I am embarking immedi-
ately on a sales campaign to cover the whole country*
You will be one of my distributors. The books sell at
from ten to fifty cents. On each ten-cent book you make
a cent, on the fifty-cent books you make five cents .      .
    ^^And don’t I get anything every week?” stammered
Fainy.
      Would you be penny-wise and pound-foolish? Throw-
ing away the most magnificent opportunity of a lifetime
for the assurance of a paltry pittance. No, I can see by
your flaming eye, by your rebellious name out of old Ire-
land’s history, that you are a young man of spirit and
determination . . . Are we on? Shake hands on it then
and by gad, Fenian, you shall never regret it,”
    Doc Bingham jumped to his feet and seized Fainy’&
hand and shook it.
    ""Now, Fenian, come with me5 ^we have an impcirtant
preliminary errand to perform.” Doc Bingham pulled his
hat forward bn his head and they walked down the stairs
                                 he was a big man and the fat hung
to the front door 3
 loosely on him as he walked. Anyway, it’s a job, Fainy
told himself.
    First they went to a tailorshop where a longnosed yel-
low mail whom Doc Bingham addressed as Lee shuffled
 out to meet them. The tailorshkip smelt of steamed clbth

                                                                                  33

51
/nd cleansing fluid. Lee talked as if he had no palate to
his mouth.
       ’M pretty sick man,” he said. ^^Spen’ mor^n thou^an’
dollarm on doctor, no get well.”
   ^^Well, Pll stand by you5 you know that, Lee.”
   ^^Hure, Mannie, hure, only you owe me too much
money.”
   Dr. Emmanuel Bingham glanced at Fainy out of the
corner of his eye.
         can assure you that the entire financial situation will
be clarified within sixty days . . . But what I want you
\o do now is to lend me two of your big cartons, those
cardboard boxes you send suits home in.”
    ^What you wan^ to do?”
    “My young friend and I have a little project.”
                                                                                          my
    “Don^t you do nothin^ crooked with them cartons 5
name’s on them.”
    Doc Bingham laughed heartily as they walked out the
door, carrying under each arm one of the big flat cartons
that had Levy and Goldstein^ Reliable Tailoringy written
on them in florid lettering.
    “He’s a great joker, Fenian,” he said. “But let that
man’s lamentable condition be a lesson to you . . . The
poor unfortunate is suffering from the consequences of a
horrible social disease, contracted through some youthful
folly.”
    They were passing the taxidermist’s store again. There
were the wildcats and the golden pheasant and the big
lawfish . . . Frequents shallow bays and inlets, Fainy
had a temptation to drop the tailor’s cartons and run for

it. But anyhow, it was a job.
    “Fenian,” said Doc Bingham, confidentially, “do you
Jmow the Mohawk House?”
    “Yessir, we used to do their printing for them.”
     “They don’t know you there, do they?”

         34

52
    ‘‘Naw, they wouldn’t know me from Adam ... I jusl
delivered some writin’ paper there once.”
    “That’s superb ... Now get this right} my room is
303. ^ ou wait and come in about five minutes. You’re the
boy from the tailor’s, see, getting some suits to be cleaned.
Then you come up to my room and get the suits and take
’em round to my office. If anybody asks you where you’re
going with ’em, you’re goin’ to Levy and Goldstein, see?”
    Fainy drew a deep breath.
    “Sure, I get you.”
    When he reached the small room in the top of the
Mohawk House, Doc Bingham was pacing the floor.
    “Levy and Goldstein, sir,” said Fainy, keeping his face
straight.
    “My boy,” said Doc Bingham, “you’ll be an able assist-
ant, I’m glad I picked you out. I’ll give you a dollar in
advance on your wages.” While he talked he was taking
clothes, papers, old books, out of a big trunk that stood
in the middle of the floor. He packed them carefully in
one of the cartons. In the other he put a furlined over-
coat. “That coat cost two hundred dollars, Fenian, a rem-
nant of former splendors . . . Ah, the autumn leaves at
Vallombrosa . . . Et tu in Arcadia vixisti .              . . That’s
Latin, a language of scholars.”
    “My Uncle Tim who ran the printing shop where I
worked knew Latin fine.”
    “Do you think you can carry these, Fenian . . . they’re
not too heavy?”
    “Sure I can carry ’em.” Fainy wanted to ask about the
dollar.
    “All right, you’d better run along . .           . Wait for me
at the office.”
    In the ofiice Fainy found a man sitting at the second
rolltop desk. “Well, what’s your business?” he yelled out
in a rasping voice. He was a sharpnosed waxyskinned
young man with straight black hair standing straight up.

                                                                                 35

53
Fainy was winded from running up the stairs. His arms
were stiff from carrying the heavy cartons. “I suppose
this is some more of Mannie’s tomfoolishness. Tell him
he’s got to clear out of here; I’ve rented the other desk.”
    “But Dr. Bingham has just hired me to work for the
Truthseeker Literary Distributing Company.”
    “The hell he has.”
    “He’ll be here in a minute.”
    “Well, sit down and shut up; can’t you see I’m busy.?”
    Fainy sat down glumly in the swivelchair by the win-
dow, the only chair m the office not piled high with small
papercovered books. Outside the window he could see a
few dusty roofs and fire escapes. Through grimy windows
he could see other offices, other rolltop desks. On the desk
in front of him were paperwrapped packages of books.
 Between them were masses of loose booklets. His eye
caught a title:

         THE QUEEN OF THE WHITE SLAVES
    Scandalous revelations of Milly Meecham stolen from
her farents at the age of sixteen, tricked by her vile
 seducer into a life of infamy and shame.

     He started reading the book. His tongue got dry and
 he felt sticky all over.
     “Nobody said anything to you, eh.?” Doc Bingham’s
 booming voice broke in on his reading. Before he could
 answer the voice of the man at the other desk snarled out:
 “Look here, Mannie, you’ve got to clear out of here . . .
 I’ve rented the desk.”
     “Shake not thy gory locks at me; Samuel Epstein. My
 yoxing friend and I are just preparing an expedition
 among the aborigines of darkest Michigan. We are leav-
 ing for Saginaw tonight. Within sixty days I’ll come back
 and take the office ofi your hands. This young man is
 coming- with mfe to learn the' business.”

          36

54
                                                                                          —


    ^^Business, hell,” growled the other man, and shoved
his face back down among his papers again.
    ^Procrastination, Fenian, is the thief of time,” said Doc
Bingham, putting one fat hand Napoleonfashion into his
doublebreasted vest. “There is a tide in the affairs of men
that taken at its full .         , And for two hours Fainy
sweated under his direction, packing booklets into brown
paper packages, tying them and addressing them to Truth-
seeker Inc., Saginaw, Mich.
    He begged off for an hour to go home to see his folks^
Milly kissed him on the forehead with thin tight lips.
                                                                         oh, I wish 1
Then she burst out crying. “YouVe lucky j
was a boy,” she spluttered and ran upstairs. Mrs. O^Hara
said to be a good boy and always live at the Y.M.C.A.
that kept a boy out of temptation, and to let his Uncle
Tim be a lesson to him, with his boozin^ ways.
    His throat was pretty tight when he went to look for
his Uncle Tim. He found him in the back room at
O^Grady’s. His eyes were a flat bright blue and his lower
lip trembled when he spoke, “Have one drink with me^
son, you’re on your own now.” Fainy drank down a beer
without tasting it.
    “Fainy, you’re a bright boy ... I wish I could have
helped you morej you’re an O’Hara every inch of you..
You read Marx . . . study all you can, remember that
you’re a rebel by birth and blood . . . Don’t blame peo-
ple for things . .        . Look at that terrible forktongued
                                       do I blame her? No, I blame the
virago I’m married to 5
system. And don’t ever sell out to the sons of bitches, son;

it’s women’ll make you sell out every time. You know
what I mean. All right, go on . . . better cut along or
you’ll miss your train.” “I’ll write you from Saginaw,
Uncle Tim, honest I will.”
    Uncle Tim’s lanky red face in the empty cigarsmoky
room, the bar and its glint of brass and the pinkarmed
barkeep leaning across it, the bottles and the mirrors and

                                                                                  37

55
the portrait of Lincoln gave a misty half turn in his head
and he was out in the shiny rainy street under the shiny
clouds, hurrying for the Elevated station with his suitcase
in his hand.
    At the Illinois Central station he found Doc Bingham
waiting for him, in the middle of a ring of brown paper
parcels. Fen felt a little funny inside when he saw him,
the greasy sallow jowls, the doublebreasted vest, the
baggy black ministerial coat, the dusty black felt hat that
made the hair stick out in a sudden fuzzycurl over the
beefy ears. Anyway, it was a job.

    ^^It must be admitted, Fenian,” began Doc Bingham as
soon as Fainy had come up to him, ^^that confident as I
am of my knowledge of human nature I was a little afraid
you wouldn’t turn up. Where is it that the poet says that
difficult is the first fluttering course of the fledgeling from
 the nest. Put these packages on the train while I go pur-
 chase tickets, and be sure it’s a smoker.”
     After the train had started and the conductor had
 punched the tickets Doc Bingham leaned over and tapped
 Fainy on the knee with a chubby forefinger. ‘^I’m glad
 you’re a neat dresser, my boyj you must never forget the
 importance of putting up a fine front to the world.
 Though the heart be as dust and ashes, yet must the outer
 man be sprightly and of good cheer. We will go sit for
 a while in the pullman smoker up ahead to get away from
 the yokels.”
     It was raining hard and the windows of the train were
 striped with transverse beaded streaks against the dark-
 ness. Fainy felt uneasy as he followed Doc Bingham
 lurching through the greenplush parlor car to the small
 leather upholstered smokingcompartment at the end.
 There Doc Bingham drew a large cigar from his pocket
 and began blowing a magnificent series of smoke rings.
  Fainy sat beside him with his feet under the seat trying
  to take up as little room as possible,

           ai

56
                                                                                y



   Gradually the compartment filled up with silent men
and crinkly spiralling cigarsmoke. Outside the rain beat
against the windows with a gravelly sound. For a long
time nobody said anything. Occasionally a man cleared his
throat and let fly towards the cuspidor with a big gob of
phlegm or a jet of tobacco juice.
    ^Well, sir,” a voice began, coming from nowhere in
particular, addressed to nowhere in particular, ^fit was a
great old inauguration even if we did freeze to death.^’
    “Were you in Washington?”
    “Yessir, I was in Washington.”
    “Most of the trains didn’t get in till the next day.”
    “I know ity I was lucky, there was some of them
j!inowed up for forty-eight hours.”
    “Some blizzard all right.”

            All day the gusty northwind here
            The lessening drift its breath before
            Low circling through its southern zone
            The sun through dazzling snowmist shone

recited Doc Bingham coyly, with downcast eyes.
    “You must have a good memory to be able to recite
verses right off the reel like that.”
    “Yessir, I have a memory that may I think, without
undue violation of modesty, be called compendious. Were

it a natural gift I should be forced to blush and remain
silent, but since it is the result of forty years of study of
what is best in the world’s epic lyric and dramatic litera-

tures, I feel that to call attention to it may sometimes
encourage some other whose feet are also bound on the
paths of enlightenment and selfeducation.” He turned
suddenly to Fainy. “Young man, would you like to hear
 Othello’s address to the Venetian senate?”
    “Sure I would,” said Fainy, blushing.
     “Well, at last Teddy has a chance to carry out his word
 about fighting the trusts.” “I’m telling you the insurgent

                                                                                  39

57
farmer vote of the great Northwest . .           ^^Ternble thing
the wreck of those inauguration specials.^^
   But Doc Bingham was off:

          Most fotent grave and reverend signiors^
          My very noble md affroved good masters^
          That I have ta?en away this old man^s daughter
          It is most true; true^ I have married her . , .

    ^^They won’t get away with those antitrust laws, be-
lieve me they won’t. You can’t curtail the liberty of the
individual liberty in that way.” ^^It’s the liberty of the
individual business man that the progressive wing of the
Republican party is trying to protect.”
    But Doc Bingham was on his feet, one hand was tucked
into his doublebreasted vest, with the other he was mak-
ing broad circular gestures:

      RtUe am I in sfeech
      And little blessed with the soft 'phrase of peace^
      For since these arms of mine had seven years^ pith
      Till now some nine moons wasted they have used
       Their dearest action in the tented field,

    ^‘The farmer vote,” the other man began shrilly, but
nobody was listening. Doc Bingham had the floor.

            And little of the great world can I speak
            More than pertains to broils cmd battle
            And therefore little shall I grace my cause
            In speaking for myself.

    The train began to slacken speed. Doc Bingham’s voice
sounded oddly loud in the lessened noise. Fainy felt his
back pushing into the back of the seat and then suddenly
there was stillness and the sound of an engine bell in the
distance and Doc Bingham’s voice in a queasy whisper:
     ^^Gentlemen, I have here in pamphlet form a complete
md unexpurgated edition of one of the world’s classics, the
         40

58
famous Decameron of Boccaccio, that for four centuries has
been a byword for spicy wit and ribald humor . . He
took a bundle of little books out of one of his sagging
pockets and began dandling them in his hand. ^^Just as an
act of friendship I would be willing to part with some if
any of you gentlemen care for them . . . Here, Fenian,,
                                                                   theyVe two dol-
take these and see if anybody wants one 5
lars apiece. My young friend here will attend to distribu-
tion .. . Goodnight, gentlemen.” And he went oif and
the train had started again and Fainy found himself stand-
ing with the little books in his hand in the middle of the
lurching car with the suspicious eyes of all the smokers
boring into him like so many gimlets.

    ^^Let’s see one,” said a little man with protruding ears
who sat in the corner. He opened the book and started
reading greedily. Fainy stood in the center of the car,

feeling pins and needles all over. He caught a white glint
m the corner of an eyeball as the little man looked down
the line of cigars through the crinkly smoke. A touch of
pink came into the protruding ears.
     “Hot stuff,” said the little man, “but two dollars is too
much.”
     Fainy found himself stuttering: “They^re nnnot

                         I don^t know .    . .”
mmmine, sir 5
    “Oh, well, what the hell . . The little man dropped
 two dollar bills in Fainy’s hand and went back to his read-

 ing. Fainy had six dollars in his pocket and two books left
 when he started back to the daycoach. Half way down the

 car he met the conductor. His heart almost stopped beat-

 ing. The conductor looked at him sharply but said noth-

 ing.
     Doc Bingham was sitting in his seat with his head in his

 hand and his eyes closed as if he were dozing. Fainy

 slipped into the seat beside him.
     “How many did they take?” asked Doc Bingham, talk-

                                                                                  41

59
ing out of the corner of his mouth without opening his
eyes.
         got six bucks . . . Golly, the conductor scared me,
the way he looked at me.^^
    ^^You leave the conductor to me, and remember that it^s
never a crime in the face of humanity and enlightenment
to distribute the works of the great humanists among the
merchants and moneychangers of this godforsaken coun-
try ... You better slip me the dough.”
    Fainy wanted to ask about the dollar he’d been prom-
ised, but Doc Bingham was off on Othello again:

    If after every temfest there come such calms as this
    Then may the laboring bark chmb hills of seas
    Olymfus high.

    They slept late at the Commercial House in Saginaw,
and ate a large breakfast, during which Doc Bingham
discoursed on the theory and practice of book salesman-
ship. “I am very much afraid that through the hinterland
to which we are about to penetrate,” he said as he cut up
three fried eggs and stuffed his mouth with bakingpowder
biscuit, ^^that we will find the yokels still hankering after
Maria Monk.”
    Fainy didn’t know who Maria Monk was, but he didn’t
 like to ask. He went with Doc Bingham round to Hum-
 mer’s livery stable to hire a horse and wagon. There fol-
 lowed a long wrangle between the firm of Truthseeker
 Inc,, and the management of Hummer’s Livery Stable
 as to the rent of a springwagon and an elderly piebald
 horse with cruppers you could hang a hat on, so that it
 was late afternoon before they drove out of Saginaw with
 their packages of books piled behind them, bound for the
 road.
     It was a chilly spring day. Sagging clouds moved in a
 gray blur over a bluish silvery sky. The piebald kept
 slackening to a walkj Fainy clacked the reins continually

          42

60
on his caving rump and clucked with his tongue until his
mouth was dry. At the first whack the piebald would ga
into a lope that would immediately degenerate into an
irregular jogtrot and then into a wdk, Fainy cursed and
clucked, but he couldn’t get the horse to stay in the lope
or the jogtrot. Meanwhile Doc Bingham sat beside him
with his broad hat on the back of his head, smoking a
cigar and discoursing. ^^Let me say right now, Fenian, that
the attitude of a man of enlightened ideas, is, A fhgue
on both your houses ... I myself am a pantheist . . .
but even a pantheist . .    . must eat, hence Maria Monk.”
A few drops of rain, icy and stinging as hail, had begun
to drive in their faces. ^^Pll get pneumonia at this rate,
                                              I thought you said you could
and it’ll be your fault, too \
drive a horse .    ,  . Here, drive into that farmhouse on
the left. Maybe they’ll let us put the horse and wagon in

their barn.”
    As they drove up the lane towards the gray house and
the big gray barn that stood under a clump of pines a little

off from the road, the piebald slowed to a walk and began
reaching for the bright green clumps of grass at the edge
of the ditch. Fainy beat at him with the ends of the reins,
and even stuck his foot over the dashboard and kicked
him, but he wouldn’t budge.
    ^^Goddam it, give me the reins.”
    Doc Bingham gave the horse’s head a terrible yank, but

all that happened was that he turned his head and looked

at them, a green foam of partly chewed grass between his
Jong yellow teeth. To Fainy it looked as if he were laugh-

 ing. The rain had come on hard. They put their coat col-

lars up. Fainy soon had a little icy trickle down the back

of his neck.
    ^^Get out and walkj goddam it to hell, lead it if you

can’t drive it,” sputtered Doc Bingham. Fainy jumped
out and led the horse up to the back door of the farm-

                                                                                  43

61
house, the rain ran down his sleeve from the hand he
held the horse by.
    ^^Good afternoon, ma’am.” Doc Bingham was on his
feet bowing to a little old woman who had come out of
the door. He stood beside her on the stoop out of the
rain. ^^Do you mind if I put my horse and wagon in your
barn for a few moments*^ I have valuable perishable ma-
terials in the wagon and no waterproof covering . .
The old woman nodded a stringy white head. “Well,
that’s very kind of you, I must say .                 . . All right,
Fenian, put the horse in the barn and come here and
bring in that little package under the seat ... I was
just saying to my young friend here that I was sure that
some good Samaritan lived in this house who would take
in two weary wayfarers,” “Come inside, mister . . ,
maybe you’d like to set beside the stove and dry your-
self. Come inside, mister-er?” “Doc Bingham’s the name

 . * the Reverend Doctor Bingham,” Fainy heard him
tay as he went in the house.
    He was soaked and shivering when he went into the
house himself, carrying a package of books under his arm.
Doc Bingham was sitting large as life in a rocking chair
in front of the kitchen stove. Beside him on the well-
scrubbed deal table was a piece of pie and a cup of coffee.
The kitchen had a warm cosy smell of apples and bacon
grease and lamps. The old woman was leaning over the
 kitchen table listening intently to what Doc Bingham was
saying. Another woman, a big scrawny woman with her
 scant sandy hair done up in a screw on top of her head,
 stood in the background with her redknuckled hands on
 her hips. A black and white cat, back arched and tail in
 the air, was rubbing against Doc Bingham’s legs.
     “Ah, Fenian, just in time,” he began in a voice that
 purred like the cat, “I was just telling . . . relating to
 your kind hostesses the contents of our very interesting
 and educational library, the prime of the world’s dcvo-

          44

62
tional and inspirational literature. They have been so
kind to us during our little misforhine with the weather
that I thought it would be only fair to let them see a few
of our titles.”
    The big woman was twisting her apron. “I like a mite
o’ readin’ fine,” she said, shyly, “but I don’t git much
chanct for it, not till wintertime.”
    Benignly smiling. Doc Bingham untied the string and
pulled the package open on his knees. A booklet droppai
to the floor. Fainy saw that it was The Queen of the
White Slaves, A shade of sourness went over Doc Bing-*
ham’s face. He put his foot on the dropped book.
“These are Gospel Talks, my boy,” he said. “I wanted
Doctor Sfikenard’s Short Sermons for All Occasions*
He handed the halfopen package to Fainy, who snatched
it to him. Then he stooped and picked the book up from
under his foot with a slow sweeping gesture of the han(|
and slipped it in his pocket. “I suppose I’ll have to ge
find them myself,” he went on in his purringest voice.
When the kitchen door closed behind them he snarled in
Fainy’s ear, “Under the seat, you little rat . . . If you
play a trick like that again I’ll break every goddam
bone in your body.” And he brought his knee up so hard
into the seat of Fainy’s pants that his teeth clacked to-
gether and he shot out into the rain towards the bam.
“Honest, I didn’t do it on purpose,” Fainy whined. But
Doc Bingham was already back in the house and his voice
was burbling comfortably out into the imny dusk with
the first streak of lamplight.
    This time Fainy was careful to open the package before
he brought it in. Doc Bingham took the books out of his
hand without looking at him and Fainy went round be-
hind the stovepipe. He stood there in the soggy steam q£
his clothes listening to Doc Bingham boom. He was
hungry, but nobody seemed to think of offering Wm;*
piece of pie.

                                                                                 45

63
   “Ah, my dear friends, how can I tell you with what
gratitude to the Great Giver a lonely minister of the
gospel of light, wandering among the tares and troubles
of this world, finds ready listeners. I’m sure that these

little books will be consoling, interesting and inspirational

to all that undertake the slight effort of perusal. I feel

 his so strongly that I always carry a few extra copies with
me to dispose of for a moderate sum. It breaks my heart
that I can’t yet give them away free gratis.”
    “How much are they?” asked the old woman, a sud-
den sharpness coming over her features. The scrawny
woman let her arms drop to her side and shook her head.
     “Do you remember, Fenian,” asked Doo Bingham,
 leaning genially back in his chair, “what the cost price of
 these little booklets was?” Fainy was sore. He didn’t
 answer. “Come here, Fenian,” said Doc Bingham in
 honied tones, “allow me to remind you of the words of
 the immortal bard:

             LoviUness is 'your ambition’s ladder
             Whereto the climber upward turns his face
             But when he once attains the tofmost round
             He then unto the ladder turns his back

     “You must be hungry. You can eat my pie.”
      “I reckon we can find the boy a piece of pie,” said the
  old woman.
      “Ain’t they ten cents?” said Fainy, coming forward.
      “Oh, if they’re only ten cents I think I’d like one,”
   aid the old woman quickly. The scrawny woman started

  to say something, but it was too late.
      The pie had hardly disappeared into Fainy’s gullet and
  the bright dime out of the old tobaccobox In the cup-
  board into Doc Bingham’s vest pocket when there was a
  eqund of clinking harness and the glint of a buggylamp
   throxigh the rainy dark outside the window. The old
   woman got to her feet and looked nervously at the door,

           46

64
which immediately opened. A heavyset grayhaired man
with a small goatee sprouting out of a round red face
came in, shaking the rain off the flaps of his coat. After
him came a skinny lad about Fainy’s age.
    “How do you do, sir; how do you do, son?” boomed
Doc Bingham through the last of his pie and coffee.
    “They asked if they could put their horse in the bar/i
until it should stop rainin’. It’s all right, ain’t it, James?”
asked the old woman nervously. “I reckon so,” said the
older man, sittmg down heavily in the free chair. The old
woman had hidden the pamphlet in the drawer of the
kitchen table. “Travelin’ in books, I gather.” He stared
hard at the open package of pamphlets. “Well, we don’t
need any of that trash here, but you’re welcome to stay
the night in the barn. This is no night to throw a human
being out inter.”
    So they unhitched the horse and made beds for them-
selves in the hay over the cowstable. Before they left the
house the older man made them give up their matches
“Where there’s matches there’s danger of fire,” he said.
Doc Bingham’s face was black as thunder as he wrapped
himself in a horseblanket, muttering about “indignity ta
a wearer of the cloth.” Fainy was excited and happy. He
lay on his back listening to the beat of the rain on the
roof and its gurgle in the gutters, and the muffled stirring
and chomping of the cattle and horse, under them; his
nose was full of the smell of the hay and the warm
 meadowsweetness of the cows. He wasn’t sleepy. He
 wished he had someone his own age to talk to. Anyway,

 It was a job and he was on the road.
    He had barely got to sleep when a light woke him.
 The boy he’d seen in the kitchen was standing over him
with a kntern. His shadow hovered over them enormous
 against the rafters.
    “Say, I wanner buy a book.”
    “What kind of a book?” Fainy yawned and sat up.

                                                                                 47

65
   “You know . . . one o’ them books about chorus girls
an’ white slaves an’ stuff like that.”
    “How much do you want to pay, son?” came Doc
Bingham’s voice from under the horseblanket. “We have
a number of very interesting books stating the facts of
life frankly and freely, describing the deplorable licen-
tiousness of life in the big cities, ranging from a dollar to
five dollars. The Comflete Sexology of Dr. Burnside,
is six fifty.”
    “I couldn’t go higher’n a dollar . . . Say, you won’t
tell the ole man on me?” the young man said, turning
from one to another. “Seth Hardwick, he lives down the
road, he went into Saginaw onct an’ got a book from a
man at the hotel. Gosh, it was a pippin.” He tittered un-
easily.
    “Fenian, go down and get him The Queen of the Whtte
Slaves for a dollar,” said Doc Bingham, and settled back
to sleep.
     Fainy and the farmer’s boy went down the rickety
 ladder.
     “Say, is she pretty spicy? . . . Gosh, if pop finds it
 he’ll give me a whalin’ . .       . Gosh, I bet you’ve read all
 them books.”
     “Me?” said Fainy haughtily. “I don’t need to read
books. I kin see life if I wanter. Here it is        . . . it’s about
 fallen women.”
     “Ain’t that pretty short for a dollar? I thought you
 could get a big book for a dollar.”
     “This one’s pretty spicy.”
     “Well, I guess I’ll take it before dad ketches me
 snoopin’ around . . . Goodnight.” Fainy went back to
 his bed in the hay and fell fast asleep. He was dreaming
 that he was going up a rickety stair in a barn with his
 sister Milly who kept getting all the time bigger and
 whiter and fatter, and had on a big hat with ostrich
 Illumes all round it and her dress began to split from the

66
neck and lower and lower and Doc Bingham’s voice was
saying, She’s Maria Monk, the queen of the white slaves,
and just as he was going to grab her, sunlight opened his
eyes. Doc Bingham stood in front of him, his feet wide
apart, combing his hair with a pocketcomb and reciting:

                   us defarty the universal sun
            Confines not to one land his blessed beams
            Nor is man rooted like a tree , , .

    ^^Come, Fenian,” he boomed, when he saw that Fainy
was awake, ^det us shake the dust of this inhospitable farm,
latcheting our shoes with a curse like philosophers of old

.  .  . Hitch up the horsey we’ll get breakfast down the
road.”
    This went on for several weeks, until one evening they
found themselves driving up to a neat yellow house in
a grove of feathery dark tamaracks. Fainy waited in the
wagon while Doc Bingham interviewed the people in the
house. After a while Doc Bingham appeared in the door,
a broad smile creasing his cheeks. “We’re going to be very
handsomely treated, Fenian, as befits a wearer of the cloth
and all that ... You be careful how you talk, will you?
Take the horse to the barn and unhitch.”
    “Say, Mr. Bingham, how about my money? It’s three
weeks now.” Fainy jumped down and went to the horse’s
head.
    An expression of gloom passed over Doc Bingham’s
face. “Oh, lucre, lucre  . .

      ^^Examme well
        His milkwhite handy the falm is hardly clean
        But here and there cm ugly smutch affearSy
        Fohy Hwas a bnbe that left it. , . .

    “I had great plans for a cooperative enterprise that
you are spoiling by- your youthfiil haste and greed . .         .

but if   . you must I’ll hand over to you this very night

                                                                                 49

67
everything due you and more. All right, unhitch the horse
and bring me that little package with Maria Monky and
The Pofish PlotT
    It was a warm day. There were robins singing round
the barn. Everything smelt of sweetgrass and flowers.
The barn was red and the yard was full of white leg-
horns. After he had unhitched the spring wagon and put
the horse in a stall, Fainy sat on a rail of the fence look-
ing out over the silvergreen field of oats out back, and
smoked a cigarette. He wished there was a girl there he
could put his arm round or a fellow to talk to.
    A hand dropped onto his shoulder. Doc Bingham was
standing beside him.
    “Fenian, my young friend, we are in clover,” he said.
“She is alone in the house, and her husband has gone to
town for two days with the hired man. Therein be nobody
 there but her two little children, sweet bairns. Perhaps I
shall play Romeo. YouVe never seen me in love. IPs
 my noblest role. Ah, some day Vll tell you about my
 headstrong youth. Come and meet the sweet charmer.”
     When they went in the kitchen door a dimplefaced
 pudgy woman in a lavender housecap greeted them coyly.
     “This is my young assistant, ma’am,” said Doc Bing-
 ham, with a noble gesture. “Fenian, this is Mrs. Kovach.”
     “You must be hungry. We’re having supper right
 away.”
     The last of the sun lit up a kitchen range that was
 crowded with saucepans and stewpots. Fragrant steam rose
 in little jets from round wellpolished lids. As she spoke
 Mrs. Kovach leaned over so that her big blue behind with
 starched apronstrings tied in a bow above it stood up
 straight in the air, opened the oven door and pulled out
 a great pan of cornmufiins that she dumped into a dish
 on the dining table already set next the window. Their
  warm toasted smoke filled the kitchen. Fainy felt his
  mouth watering. Doc Bingham was rubbing his hands and
          50

68
roiling his eyes. They sat down, and the two bluft-eycd
smearyfaced children were sat down and started gobbling
silently, and Mrs. Kovach heaped their plates with stewed!
tomatoes, mashed potatoes, beef stew and limabeans with
pork. She poured them out coffee and then said with
moist eyes, as she sat down herself:
    “I love to see men eat.”
    Her face took on a crushed pansy look that made Fainy
turn away his eyes when he found himself looking at it
After supper she sat listening with a pleased, frightenec
expression while Doc Bingham talked and talked, now
and then stopping to lean back and blow a smoke ring
at the lamp.
    ‘‘While not myself a Lutheran as you might say, ma’am,
I myself have always admired, nay, revered, the great
figure of Martin Luther as one of the lightbringers oi
mankind. Were it not for him we would be still groveling
under the dread domination of the Pope of Rome.”
    “They’ll never get into this country; land sakesj it give.*'
me the creeps to think of it.”
    “Not while there’s a drop of red blood in the veins of
freeborn Protestants . . . but the way to fight darkness,
ma’am, is with light. Light comes from education, reading
of books and studies . . .”
    “Land sakes, it gives me a headache to read most books,
an’ I don’t get much time, to tell the truth. My husband,
he reads books he gets from the Department of Agricul-
ture. He tried to make me read one once, on raisin’ poul-

try, but I couldn’t make much sense out of it. His folk*
they come from the old country ... I guess people feels

different over there.”
    “It must be difficult being married to a foreigner like

that.”
    “Sometimes I don’t know how I stand it; course hf-
Was awful goodlookin’ when I married him ... I never
tould resist a goodlookin’ man.”

69
   Doc Bingham leaned further across the table. His eyes
rolled as if they were going to drop out.
         never could resist a goodlooking lady.”
    Mrs. Kovach sighed deeply.
    Fainy got up and went ouL He^d been trying to get in
a word about getting paid, but what was the use? Outside
                       the stars were bright above the roofs of the
it was chilly j
barns and outhouses. From the chickencoop came an occa-
sional sleepy cluck or the rustle of feathers as a hen lost
her balance on her perch. He walked up and down the
barnyard cursing Doc Bingham and kic^ng at an occa-
sional clod of manure.
    Later he looked into the lamplit kitchen. Doc Bingham
had his arm around Mrs. Kovaches waist and was declaim-
ing verses, making big gestures with his free hand:

         . . . These things to hear
         Would Desdemon^ seriously incline
         But still the house afairs mould dram her hence
         Which ever as she could with haste disfatch
         She^d come again and with a greedy ear . . .

     Fainy shook his fist at the window. ‘^Goddam your
 hide, I want my money,” he said aloud. Then he went for
 a walk down the road. When he came back he was sleepy
 and chilly. The kitchen was empty and the lamp was
 turned down low. He didn^t know where to go to sleep,

  so he settled down to warm himself in a chair beside the

  fire. His head began to nod and he fell asleep.

      Al tremendous thump on the floor above and a woman^s
  shrieks woke him. His first thought was that Doc Bing-
  ham was robbing and murdering the woman. But im-
 mediately he heard another voice cursing and shouting
  in broken English, He had half gotten up from the chair,
  when Doc Bingharn dashed past him. He had on only
  his flannel unionsuit. In one hand were his shoes, in the

           52

70
other his clothes. His trousers floated after him at th«
end of his suspenders like the tail of a kite.
    “Hey, what are we going to do?” Fainy called after
him, but got no answer. Instead he found himself face to
face with a tall dark man with a scraggly black beard who
was coolly fitting shells into a doublebarrelled shotgun.
    “Buckshot. I shoot the sonabitch.”
    “Hey, you can’t do that,” began Fainy. He got the butt
of the shotgun in the chest and went crashing down into
the chair again. The man strode out the door with a long
elastic stride, and there followed two shots that went
rattling among the farm buildings. Then the woman’s
shrieks started up again, punctuating a longdrawnout
hysterical tittering and sobbing.
    Fainy sat in the chair by the stove as if glued to it.
    He noticed a fiftycent piece on the kitchen floor that
must have dropped out of Doc Bingham’s pants as he
ran. He grabbed it and had just gotten it in his pocket
when the tall man with the shotgun came back.
    “No more shells,” he said thickly. Then he sat down
on the kitchen table among the uncleared supper dishes
and began to cry like a child, the tears trickling through
the knobbed fingers of his big dark hands. Fainy stole out
of the door and went to the barn. “Doc Bingham,” he
called gently. The harness lay in a heap between the
shafts of the wagon, but there was no trace of Doc Bing-
ham or of the piebald horse. The frightened clucking of
the hens disturbed in the hencoop mixed with the woman’s
shrieks that still came from upstairs in the farmhouse.
“What the hell shall I do?” Fainy was asking himself
when he caught sight of a taU figure outlined in the
bright kitchen door and pointing the shotgun at him,
Just as the shotgun blazed away he ducked into the barn
and out through the back door. Buckshot whined over his
head. “Gosh, he foxind shells.” Fainy was oS as fast as

                                                                                 55

71
his legs could carry him across the oatfield. At last, with-
out any breath in his body, he scrambled over a railfencc

full of briars that tore his face and hands and lay flat in

a dry ditch to rest. There was nobody following him*



                                                      NEWSREEL III


        ‘TT TAKES NERVE TO LIVE IN THIS
WORLD” LAST WORDS OF GEORGE SMITH
HANGED WITH HIS BROTHER BY MOB IN
KANSAS MARQUIS OF QUEENSBERRY DEAD
FLAMES WRECK SPICE PLANT COURT SETS
ZOLA FREE

        a few years ago the anarchists of New Jersey, wearing the
McKinley button and the red badge of anarchy on their coats
arid supplied with beer by the republicans, plotted the death of
one of the crowned heads of Europe and it is likely that the
plan to assassinate the president was hatched at the same time
or soon afterward

    /Pj moonlighv fair tcmght ufon the Wabash
    From the fields there comes the breath of newtnouun hay
     Through the sycamores the candlelight is gleaming
    On the banks of the Wabash for away

                OUT FOR BULLY GOOD TIME

        Six Thousand Workmen at Smolensk Parade With Plac-
 irds Saying Death To Czar Assassin.
        riots and streetblockades mark opening of teamster’s strike

      WORLD’S GREATEST SEA BATTLE NEAR
         Madrid police clash with 5000 workmen carrying black
 flag
         spectators become dizzy while dancer eats oiange break-
 *Xig record that made man insane

          f4-

72
                               THE CAMERA EYE (5)


        and we played the battle of Port Arthur in the bath-

tub and the water leaked down through the drawing-

room ceiling and it was altogether too bad but in Kew
Gardens old Mr, Garnet who was still hale and hearty

idthough so very old came to tea and we saw him first

through the window with his red face and John Bull

whiskers and aunty said it was a sailoPs rolling gait and he

was carrying a box under his arm and Vickie and Pompom

barked and here was Mr. Garnet come to tea and he

took a gramophone out of a black box and put a cylindei

on the gramophone and they pushed back the tea-things

off the corner of the table Be careful not to drop it

now they scratch rather heasy Why a hordinary

sewin’ needle would do maam but I ave special needles

        and we got to talking about Hadmiral Togo and

the Banyan and how the Roosians drank so much vodka

and killed all those poor fisherlads in the North Sea and

he wound it up very carefully so as not to break the spring

and the needle went rasp rasp         Yes I was a bluejacket

miself miboy from the time I was a little shayver not

much bigger’n you rose to be bosun’s mite on the first

British hironclad the Warrior and I can dance a ornpip*:

yet maam        and he had a mariner’s compass in red and>

blue on the back of his hand and his nails looked black

                                                                                 55

73
and thick as he fumbled with the needle and the needle

went rasp rasp and far away a band played and out of a

grindy noise in the little black horn came God Save the

King and the little dogs howled




                                                             NEWSREEL IV



                      I met my love in the Alamo
                           When the moon was on the rise
                      Her beauty quite bedimmed its light
                          So radiant were her eyes

         during the forenoon union pickets turned back a wagon
loaded with 50 campchairs on its way to the fire engine house

at Michigan Avenue and Washington street. The chairs it is
reported, were ordered for the convenience of policemen de-
tailed on strike duty

    FLEETS MAY MEET IN BATTLE TODAY
                                WEST OF LUZON

         three big wolves were killed before the dinner.
         A grand parade is proposed here in which President
 Roosevelt shall ride so that he can be seen by citizens. At the
 head will be a caged bear recently captured after killing a
 dozen dogs and injuring several men. The bear will be given
 an hour’s start for the hills then the packs will be set on the
 trail and President Roosevelt and the guides will follow in
 pursuit
          three Columbia students start auto trip to Chicago on
 wager

         GENERAL STRIKE NOW THREATENS

          I^s moonlight fair tonight ufon the Wa^-abash

           S6

74
                OIL KING’S HAPPYEST DAY

       one cherub every five minutes market for all classes of
real estate continues to be healthy with good demand for fac«
tory sites residence and business properties court bills break
labor
               BLOODY SUNDAY IN MOSCOW

       lady angels are smashed troops guard oilfields America
tends to become empire like m the days of the Caesars $5 poem
gets rich husband eat less says Edison rich poker player falls
dead when he draws royal flush charges graft in Cicero

       STRIKE MAY MEAN REVOLT IN RUSSIA

        lake romance of two yachts murder ends labor feud Michi-
gan runs all over Albion red flags in St. Petersburg

                            CZAR YIELDS TO PEOPLE

        holds dead baby forty hours families evicted by bursting
watermain
             CZAR GRANTS CONSTITUTION
    From the fields there comes the heath of newmown hay
    Through the sycamores the candlelight is gleaming



                                THE CAMERA EYE (6)


        Go it go it said Mr. Liawood the headmaster when

 one was running up the field kicking the round ball footer

they called it in Hampstead and afterwards it was time

 to walk home and one felt good because Mr. Linwood

 had said Go it

        Taylor said There’s another American come and he

 had teeth like Teddy in the newspapers and a tumedup

                                                                                  57

75
nose and a Rough Rider suit and he said Who are you

going to vote for? and one said I dunno and he stuck his

chest out and said I mean who your folks for Roosevelt

or Parker? and one said Judge Parker

        the other Americanos hair was very black and he

stuck his fists up and his nose turned up and he said Pm for

Roosevelt wanto fight? all trembly one said Pm for Judge

Parker but Taylor said WhoOs got tuppence for ginger

beer? and there wasn^t any fight that time




                                                          NEWSREEL V


                           BUGS DRIVE OUT BIOLOGIST

        elopers bind and gag; is released by dog

  EMPEROR NICHOLAS II FACING REVOLT OF
           EMPIRE GRANTS SUBJECTS LIBERTY

         paralysis stops surgeon’s knife by the stroke of a pen the
 last absolute monarchy of Europe passes into history miner of
 Death Valley and freak advertiser of Santa Fe Road may die
 sent to bridewell for steah'ng plaster angel

         On the banks of the Wabash far away.



                                                                                   MAG


      Next morning soon after daylight Fainy limped out of
  % heavy shower into the railroad station at Gaylord. There
           58

76
was a big swagbellied stove burning in the station waiting
room. The ticket agent’s window was closed. There was
nobody in sight. Fainy took oif first one drenched shoe
and then the other and toasted his feet till his socks were
dry. A blister had formed and broken on each heel and
the socks stuck to them in a grimy scab. He put on his
shoes again and stretched out on the bench. Immediately
he was asleep.
    Somebody tall in blue was speaking to him. He tried to
raise his head but he was too sleepy.
    ^^Hey, bo, you better not let the station agent find
you,” said a voice he’d been hearing before through his
sleep. Fainy opened his eyes and sat up. “Jeez, I thought
you were a cop.”
   A squareshouldered young man in blue denim shirt and
overalls was standing over him. “I thought I’d better
wake you up, station agent’s so friggin’ tough in this
dump.”
    “Thanks.” Fainy stretched his legs. His feet were so
swollen he could hardly stand on them. “Golly, I’m stiff.”
    “Say, if we each had a quarter I know a dump where
we could get a bully breakfast.”
    “I gotta dollar an’ a half,” said Fainy slowly. He stood
with his hands in his pockets, his back to the warm stove
looking carefully at the other boy’s square bulljawed face
wid blue eyes.
     “Where are you from?”
    “I’m from Duluth . . . I’m on the bum more or less.
Where are you from?”
    “Golly, I wish I knew. I had a job till last night.”
    “Resigned?”
    “Say, suppose we go eat that breakfast.”
    “That’s slick. I didn’t eat yesterday. . . . My name’s
George Hall . . . The fellers call me Ike. I ain’t exactly
 on the bum, you know. I want to see the world.”
    “I guess I’m going to have to see the world now,” said

                                                                                  59

77
Fainy, ^^My name^s McCreary. Pm from Chi. But I was
born back east in Middletown, Connecticut.”
    As they opened the screen door of the railroad men’s
boarding house down the road they were met by a smell
of ham and coffee and roachpowder. A horsetoothed
blonde woman with a rusty voice set places for them.

    ^Where do you boys work.? I don’t remember seein’
you before.”
    “I worked down to the sawmill,” said Ike.
    ^^Sawmill shet down two weeks ago because the super-
intendent blew out his brains.”
    “Don’t I know it?”
    “Maybe you boys better pay in advance.”
    “I got the money,” said Fainy, waving a dollar bill in
her face.
    “Well, if you got the money I guess you’ll pay all
right,” said the waitress, showing her long yellow teeth
in a smile.
    “Sure, peaches and cream, we’ll pay like millionaires,”
 said Ike.
    They filled up on coflFee and hominy and ham and eggs
and big heavy white bakingpowder biscuits, and by the
end of breakfast they had gotten to laughing so hard over
Fainy’s stories of Doc Bingham’s life and loves that the
waitress asked them if they’d been drinking, Ike kidded
her into bringing them each another cup of coffee with-
out extra charge. Then he fished up two mashed ciga-
 rettes from the pocket of his overalls. “Have a coffin
 nail, Mac?”
     “You can’t smoke here,” said the waitress. “The missus
 won’t stand for smokin’.”
     “All right, bright eyes, we’ll skidoo.”
     “How far are you goin’?”
     “Well, I’m headed for Duluth myself. That’s where
 l^y folks are  * “So you’re from Duluth, are you?”
          6o

78
“Well, what’s the big joke about Duluth?” “It’s Ho joke^
it’s a misfortune.”
    “You don’t think you can kid me, do you?” “’Tain’t
worth my while, sweetheart.” The waitress tittered as she
cleared oif the table. She had big red hands and thick
nails white from kitchenwork.
    “Hey, got any noospapers? I want somethin’ to read
u^tin’ for the train.” “I’ll get you some. The missus
takes the American from Chicago.” “Gee, I ain’t seen a
paper in three weeks.” “I like to read the paper, too,”
said Mac. “I like to know what’s goin’ on in the world.”
    “A lot of lies most of it . . . all owned by the im
tcrests.”
    “Hearst’s on the side of the people.”
    “I don’t trust him any more’n the rest of ’em.”
    “Ever read The Af-peal to Reason?'*
    “Say, are you a Socialist?”
    “Surej I had a job in my uncle’s printin’ shop till thft
big interests put him outa business because he took the
side of the strikers.”                                                             '

                                           put it there . . . me, too. . . ,
    “Gee, that’s swell . . .
Say, Mac, this is a big day for me ... I don’t often
meet a guy thinks like I do.”
    They went out with a roll of newspapers and sat under
a big pine a little way out of town. The sun had come
out warm; big white marble clouds sailed through the
sky. They lay on their backs with their heads on at piece
of pinkish root with bark like an alligator. In sfnte of
last night’s rain the pine needles were warm and dry
imder them. In front of them stretched the angletfack
 line through thickets and clearings of wrecked woodland
 where fireweed was beginning to thrust up here and there
 a palegreen spike of leaves. They read sheets of the week-
 old paper turn and turn about and talked.
     “Maybe in Russia it’ll start; that’s the most backward
 country where the people are oppressed worst . . .

                                                                                  61

79
There was a Russian feller workin’ down to the sawmill,
an educated feller who’s fled from Siberia ... I used
to talk to him a lot . . . That’s what he thought. He
said the social revolution would start in Russia an’ spread
all over the world. He was a swell guy. I bet he was some-
body.”
    “Uncle Tim thought it wovdd start in Germany.”
    “Oughter start right here in America ... We got
free institutions here already . . . All we have to do is
get out from under the interests.” “Uncle Tim says we’re
too well off in America ... we don’t know what op-
pression or poverty is. Him an’ my other uncles was
Fenians back in Ireland before they came to this country.
That’s what they named me Fenian . . . Pop didn’t like

it, I guess ... he didn’t have much spunk, I guess.”
    “Ever read Marx?”
                      golly, I’d like to though.” “Me neither,
    “No . . .
                                                                            that’s what
I read Bellamy’s Looking Backward, though 5
                                                                      I’d just started
made me a Socialist.” “Tell me about it 5
readin’ it when I left home.” “It’s about a galoot that
goes to sleep an’ wakes up in the year two thousand and
the social revolution’s all happened and everything’s so-

cialistic an’ there’s no jails or poverty and nobody works
for themselves an’ there’s no way anybody can get to be
a rich bondholder or capitalist and life’s pretty slick for
the working class.” “That’s what I always thought . . .

It’s the workers who create wealth and they ought to
 have it Instead of a lot of drones.” “If you could do away
with the capitalist system and the big trusts and Wall
Street things ’ud be like that.”
    “Gee.”
    “All you’d need would be a general strike and have
 the workers refuse to work for a boss any longer . . .
 God damn it, if people only realized how friggin’ easy

 it would be. The Interests own all the press and keep
 knowledge and education from the workin’men.”

         62

80
   “I know printin’, pretty good, an’ linotypin’. . .
Golly, maybe some day I could do somethin’.”
    Mac got to his feet. He was tingling all over. A cloud
had covered the sun, but down the railroad track the
scrawny woods were full of the goldgreen blare of young
birch leaves in the sun. His blood was like fire. He stood
with his feet apart looking down the railroad track. Round
the bend in the far distance a handcar appeared with a
section gang on it, a tiny cluster of brown and dark blue.
He watched it come nearer. A speck of red flag fluttered
in the front of the handcarj it grew bigger, ducking into
patches of shadow, larger and more distinct each time it
came out into a patch of sun.
    “Say, Mac, we better keep out of sight if we want to
hop that freight. There’s some friggin’ mean yard detec-
tives on this road.” “All right.” They walked off a hun-
dred yards into the young growth of scrub pine and birch.
Beside a big greenlichened stump Mac stopped to make
water. His urine flowed bright yellow in the sun, disap-
pearing at once into the porous loam of rotten leaves and
wood. He was very happy. He gave the stump a kick.

It was rotten. His foot went through it ,and a little powder
like smoke went up from it as it crashed over into the
alderbushes behind.
     Ike had sat down on a log and was picking his teeth
with a little birchtwng.
    “Say, ever been to the coast, Mac?”
    “No.”
     “Like to?”
    “Sure.”
     “Well, let’s you an’ me beat our way out to Duluth
 ... I want to stop by and say hello to the old woman,

 see. Haven’t seen her in three months. Then we’ll take

 in the wheat harvest and make Frisco or Seattle by fall.

 Tell me they have good free night-schools in Seattle. I

                                                                                  ^3

81
wailt to do some studyia’, see? I dunno a friggin’ thing
yet.”
   “That’s slick.”
   “Ever hopped a freight or ridden blind baggage, Mac?”
   “Well, not exactly.”
    “You just follow me and do what I do. You’ll be all
right.”
    Down the track they heard the hoot of a locomotive
whistle.
    “There is number three cornin’ round the bend now

. . . We’ll hop her right after she starts outa the station.
She’ll take us into Mackinaw City this afternoon.”
   Late that afternoon, stiff and cold, they went into a
little shed on the steamboat wharf at Mackinaw City to
get shelter. Everything was hidden in a driving rain-
streaked mist off the lake. They had bought a ten-cent
package of Sweet Caps, so that they only had ninety cents
left between them. They were arguing about how much
they ought to spend for supper when the steamboat agent,
a thin man wearing a green eyeshade and a slicker came
out of his office. “You boys lookin’ for a job''” he asked.
“Cause there’s a guy here from the Lakeview House
lookin’ for a coupla pearldivers. Agency didn’t send ’em
enough help I guess. They’re openin’ up tomorrer.”
“How much do they pay ye?” asked Ike. “I don’t reckon

it’s much, but the grub’s pretty good.” “How about it,
Mac? We’ll save up our fare an’ then we’ll go to Duluth
like a coupla dudes on the boat.”
    So they went over that night on the steamboat to
Mackinac Island. It was pretty dull on Mackinac Island.
There was a lot of small scenery with signs on it reading
“Devil’s Cauldron,” “Sugar Loaf,” “Lover’s Leap,” and
wives and children of mediumpriced business men from
Detroit, Saginaw and Chicago. The grayfaced woman who
tan the hotel, known as The Management, kept them
 working from six in the morning till way after sundown.

82
It wasn’t only dishwashing, it was sawing wood, running
errands, cleaning toilets, scrubbing floors, smashing bag-
gage and a lot of odd chores. The waitresses were all old
maids or else brokendown farmers’ wives whose husbands
drank. The only other male in the place was the cook, a
hypochondriac French Canadian halfbreed who insisted
on being called Mr, Chef. Evenings he sat in his little
log shack back of the hotel drinking paregoric and mum^
bling about God.
    When they got their first month’s pay they packed up
their few belongings in a newspaper and sneaked on board
the ]umata for Duluth. The fare took all their capital,
but they were happy as they stood in the stern watching
the spruce and balsamcovered hill of Mackinac disappear
into the lake.
                    girderwork along the waterfront, and the
    Duluth j
shack-covered hills and the tall thin chimneys and the
huddle of hunch-shouldered grain elevators under the
smoke from the mills scrolled out dark against a huge
salmon-colored sunset. Ike hated to leave the boat on,
account of a pretty dark-haired girl he’d meant all the
time to speak to. ^^Hell, she wouldn’t pay attention to
you, Ike, she’s too swank for you,” Mac kept saying. ^‘The
old woman’ll be glad to see us anyway,” said Ike as they
hurried off the gangplank.         half expected to see her at
the dock, though I didn’t write we was coming, toy, I bet
she’ll give us a swell feed.”
      Where does she live?”
    ^^Not far. I’ll show you. Say, don’t ask anythin’ about
my ole man, will yej he don’t amount to much. He’s in

jail, I guess. Ole woman’s had pretty tough sleddm’
bringin’ up us kids « . . I got two brothers iit Buffalo

 . . I don’t get along with ’em. She does fancy needle-'
work and preservin’ an’ bakes cakes an’ stuff like that.
She used to work in a bakery but she’s got the lumbagv?
                                                                                 6^

83
too bad now. She’d ’a’ been a real bright woman if we
hadn’t always been so friggin’ poor.”
   They turned up a muddy street on a hill. At the top
of the hill was a little prim house like a schoolhouse.
   ^‘That’s where we live . . . Gee, I wonder why there’s
no light.”
   They went in by a gate in the picket fence. There was
sweetwilliam in bloom in the flowerbed in front of the
house. They could smell it though they could hardly see,

it was so dark. Ike knocked.
    ^^Damn it, I wonder what’s the matter.” He knocked
again. Then he struck a match. On the door was nailed a
card “for sale” and the name of a realestate agent.
“Jesus Christ, that’s funny, she musta moved. Now I think
of it, I haven’t had a letter in a couple of months. I hope
she ain’t sick . . . I’ll ask at Bud Walker’s next door.”
    Mac sat down on the wooden step and waited. Over-
head in a gash in the clouds that still had the faintest
stain of red from the afterglow his eye dropped into
empty black full of stars. The smell of the sweetwilliams
ticlded his nose. He felt hungry.
    A low whistle from Ike roused him. “Come along,” he
said gruffly and started walking fast down the hill with
his head sunk between his shoulders.
    “Hey, what’s the matter?”
    “Nothin’. The old woman’s gone to Buffalo to live with
my brothers. The lousy bums got her to sell out so’s they
could spend the dough, I reckon.”
    “Jesus, that’s hell, Ike.”
     Ike didn’t answer. They walked till they came to the
corner of a street with lighted stores and trolleycars. A
 tune from a mechanical piano was tumbling out from a
 saloon. Ike turned and slapped Mac on the back. “Let’s
 go have a drink, kid . . . What the hell.”
     There was only one other man at the long bar. He
 Was a very drunken tall elderly man in lumbermen’s boots
         66

84
with a sou’wester on his head who kept yelling in an in-
audible voice, Whoop her up, boys,’ and making a pass
at the air with a long grimy hand. Mac and Ike drank
down two whiskies each, so strong and raw that it pretty
near knocked the wind out of them. Ike put the change
from a dollar in his pocket and said:
    “What the hell, let’s get out of here.” In the cool air
of the street they began to feel lit. “Jesus, Mac, let’s get
outa here tonight . . . It’s terrible to come back to a
town where you was a kid . . . I’ll be meetin’ all the
crazy galoots I ever knew and girls I had crushes on . .

I guess I always get the dirty end of the stick, all right.”
    In a lunchroom down by the freight depot they go',
hamburger and potatoes and bread and butter and coffee
for fifteen cents each. When they’d bought some ciga-
rettes they stiU had eight seventyfive between them.
“Golly, we’re rich,” said Mac. “Well, where do we go?”
    “Wait a minute. I’ll go scout round the freight depot.
Used to be a guy I knowed worked there.”
    Mac loafed round under a lamp post at the street-
corner and smoked a cigarette and waited. It was warmer
since the wmd had gone down. From a puddle somewhere
 in the freight yards came the peep peep peep of toads.
 Up on the hill an accordion was playing. From the yards
came the heavy chugging of a freight locomotive and the
 clank of shunted freightcars and the singing rattle of tha
 wheels.
     After a while he heard Ike’s whistle from the dark
 side of the street. He ran over. “Say, Mac, we gotta hurry.

 I found the guy. He’s goin’ to open Up a boxcar for us
 on the westbound freight. He says it’ll carry us clear out
 to the coast if we stick to it.”
     “How the hell will we eat if we’re locked up in r
 freightcar?”
     “We’ll eat fine. You leave the eatin’ to roe.”
    '“But, Ike . . .”

                                                                                  67

85
   “Keep your trap shut, can’t you . . . Do you want
everybody in the friggin’ town to know what we’re tryin’
to do?”
   They walked along tiptoe in the dark between two
tracks of boxcars. Then Ike found a door half open and
darted in. Mac followed and they shut the sliding door
very gently after them.
    “Now all we got to do is go to sleep,” whispered Ike,
his lips touching Mac’s ear. “This here galoot, see, said
there wasn’t any yard dicks on duty tonight.”
    In the end of the car they found hay from a broken
bale. The whole car smelt of hay. “Ain’t this hunky
dory?” whispered Ike.
    “It’s the cat’s nuts, Ike.”
    Pretty soon the train started, and they lay down to
sleep side by side in the sparse hay. The cold night wind
streamed in through the cracks in the floor. They slept
fitfully. The train started and stopped and started and
shunted back and forth on sidings and the wheels rattled
and rumbled in their ears and slambangcd over crossings.
Towards morning they fell into a warm sleep and the thin
 layer of hay on the boards was suddenly soft and warm.
 Neither of them had a watch and the day was overcast
 80 they didn’t know what time it was when they woke
 up. Ike slid open the door a little so that they could peek
 out; the train was running through a broad valley brim-
 fuU-like with floodwater, with the green ripple of full-
 grown wheat. Now and then in the distance a clump of
 woodland stood up like an island. At each station was
 the hunched blind bulk of an elevator. “Gee, this must be
 the Red Rivo*, but I wondeir which way we’re goin’,”
 said Ike. “GoUy, I could drink a cup of coflEee,” said Mac.
 “We’ll have swell coffee in Seattle, damned if we won’t,
 Mac.”
     They went to sleep again, and when they woke up they
 wer-t thirsty and stiff. The train had stopped; There was
          68

86
no sound at alL They lay on their backs stretching and
listening. “Gee, I wonder where in hell we are.” After a
long while they heard the cinders crunching down the
track and someone trying the fastenings of the boxcar
doors down the train. They lay so still they could hear
both their hearts beating. The steps on the cinders^
crunched nearer and nearer. The sliding door slammed
open, and their car was suddenly full of sunlight. They
lay still. Mac felt the rap of a stick on his chest and sat
up blinking. A Scotch voice was burring in his ears:
    “I thought Pd find some Pullman passengerrs .           . .
All right, byes, stand and deliver, or else you’ll go to th«
constabulary.”
    “Aw hell,” said Ike, crawling forward.
    “Currsin’ and swearin’ won’t help ye ... If you gat
a couple o’ quid you can ride on to Winnipeg an’ take yoat
chances there ... If not you’ll be doin’ a tidy bit on
the roads before you can say Jack Robinson.”
   The brakeman was a small blackhaired man with a
mean quiet manner.
    “Where are we, guv’ner?” asked Ike, trying to talk
like an Englishman.
    “Gretna . . . You’re in the Dominion of Canada. Yoi^'
can be had up, too, for illegally crossin’ Her Majesty’s
frontier as well as for bein’ vags.”
    “Well, I guess we’d better shell out . . . You see
we’re a couple of noblemen’s sons out for a bit of a bloody
lark, guv’ner.”
    “No use currsin’ and prevarricatin’. How much hava
you?”
    “Coupla dollars.”
    “Let’s see it quick.”
    Ike pulled first one dollar, then another, out of hit
pockety folded in the second dollar was a five. The Sjcotch-,
man swept the three bills up with one gesture and
slsiunmed the sliding door to. They heard him sjip dpwn:

                                                                                 69

87
the catch on the outside. For a long time they sat there
quiet in the dark. Finally Ike said, “Hey, Mac, gimme a
sock in the jaw. That was a damn fool thing to do . . .
Never oughta had that in my jeans anyway . . . oughta
had it inside my belt. That leaves us with about seventy-
five cents. We’re up shit creek now for fair . . . He’ll
probably wire ahead to take us outa here at the next big
town.” “Do they have mounted police on the railroad,
too?” asked Mac in a hollow whisper. “Jez, I don’t know
any more about it than you do.”
    The trdn started again and Ike rolled over on his face
and went glumly to sleep. Mac lay on his back behind him
 looking at the slit of sunlight that made its way in through
the crack in the door and wondered what the inside of a
 Canadian jail would be like.
    That night, after the train had lain still for some time
 in the middle of the hissing and clatter of a big freight-
 yard, they heard the catch slipped off the door. After- a
 while Ike got up his nerve to slide the door open and they
 dropped, stiff and terribly hungry, down to the cinders.
 There was another freight on the next track, so all they
 could see was a bright path of stars overhead. They got
 out of the freightyards without any trouble and found
 themselves wallang through the deserted streets of a large
 widescattered city.
     “Winnipeg’s a pretty friggin’ lonelylookin’ place, take
 it from me,” said Ike.
      “It must be after midnight.”
      They tramped and tramped and at last found a little
  lunchroom kept by a Chink who was just closing up.
  They spent forty cents on some stew and potatoes and
  coffee. They asked the Chink if he’d let them sleep on
  the floor behind the counter, but he threw them out and
  they found themselves dogtired tramping through the
  broad deserted streets of Winnipeg again. It was too cold
  to sit down anywhere, and they couldn’t find anyplace
           70

88
that looked as if it would give them a flop for thirtyfive
cents, so they walked and walked, and anyway the sky
was beginning to pale into a slow northern summer dawn.
When it was fully day they went back to the Chink’s and
spent the thirtyfive cents on oatmeal and coffee. Then they
went to the Canadian Pacific employment office and signed
up for work in a construction camp at Banff. The hours
they had to wait till traintime they spent in the public
library. Mac read part of Bellamy’s Lookmg Backward
and Ike, not being able to find a volume of Karl Marx,
read an instalment of ^^When the Sleeper Wakes” in
the Strand Magazine, So when they got on the train they
were full of the coming Socialist revolution and started
talking it up to two lanky redfaced lumberjacks who sat
opposite them. One of them chewed tobacco silently all
the while, but the other spat his quid out of the windovi
and said, “You blokes ’ll keep quiet with that kinder talk
if you knows what’s ’ealthy for ye.” ^^Hell, this is a free
country, ain’t it? A guy’s free to talk, ain’t he?” said Ikc-
      bloke kin talk so long as his betters don’t tell him te
keep his mouth shut.” ^^Hell, I’m not tryin’ to pick a
fight,” said Ike. ^^Better not,” said the other man, and
didn’t speak again.
    They worked for the C. P. R. all summer and by the

first of October they were in Vancouver. They had new
suitcases and new suits. Ike had forty-nine dollars and
fifty cents and Mac had eighty-three fifteen in a brand
new pigskin wallet. Mac had more because he didn’t play
poker. They took a dollar and a half room between them
and lay in bed like princes their first free morning. They
were tanned and toughened and their hands were horny.
After the smell of rank pipes and unwashed feet and thr.
bedbugs in the railroad bunkhouses the small cleanboardcd
hotel room with its clean beds seemed like a palace.
    When he was fully awake Mac sat up and reached foi

his Ingersoll. Eleven o’clock. The sunlight on the win^

                                                                                 71

89
dowledge was ruddy from the smoke of forestfires up the
coast. He got up and washed in cold water at the wash-
basin. He walked up and down the room wiping his face
and arms in the towel. It made him feel good to follow
the contours of his neck and the hollow between his
shoulderblades and the muscles of his arms as he dried
himself with the fresh coarse towel.
   “Say, Ike, what do you think we oughta do? I think we
oughta go down on the boat to Seattle, Wash., like a
coupla dude passengers. I wanta settle down an’ get a
printin’ job; there’s good money in that. I’m goin’ to
study to beat hell this winter. What do you think, Ike?
I want to get out of this limejuicy hole an’ get back to
God’s country. What do you think, Ike?”
    Ike groaned and rolled over in bed.
    “Say, wake up, Ike, for crissake. We want to take a
look at this burg an’ then twentythree.”
    Ike sat up in bed. “God damn it, I need a woman.”
    “I’ve heard tell there’s swell broads in Seattle, honest,
Ike.”
    Ike jumped out of bed and began splattering himself
from head to foot with cold water. Then he dashed into
his clothes and stood looking out the window combing
the water out of his hair.
    “When does the friggin’ boat go? Jez, I had two wet
dreams last night, did you?”
    Mac blushed. He nodded his head.
    “Jez, we got to get us women. Wet dreams weakens a
guy.”
    “I wouldn’t want to get sick.”
    “Aw, hell, a man’s not a man until he’s had his three
doses.”
    ‘^Aw, come ahead, let’s go see the town.”
    “Well, ain’t I been waitin’ for ye this halfhour?”
    They ran down the stairs and out into the street. They
 walked round Vancouver, sniffing the winey smell of

         72

90
lumbermills along the waterfront, loafing under the big
trees in the park. Then they got their tickets at the steam-
boat office and went to a haberdashery store and bought
themselves striped neckties, colored socks and four-dollar
silk shirts. They felt like millionaires when they walked
up the gangplank of the boat for Victoria and Seattle,
with their new suits and their new suitcases and their silh
shirts. They strolled round the deck smoking cigarettes
and looking at the girls. “Gee, there’s a couple looks
kinda easy ... I bet they’re hookers at that,” Ike
whispered in Mac’s ear and gave him a dig in the ribs with
his elbow as they passed two girls in Spring Maid hats
who were walking round the deck the other way, “Shit,

let’s try pick ’em up.”
    They had a couple of beers at the bar, then they went
back on deck. The girls had gone. Mac and Ike walked
disconsolately round the deck for a while, then they found
the girls leaning over the rail in the stern. It was a cloudy
moonlight night. The sea and the dark islands covered
with spiring evergreens shone light and dark in a mottling
silvery sheen. Both girls had frizzy hair and dark circles
under their eyes. Mac thought they looked too old, but
as Ike had gone sailing ahead it was too late to say any-
thing. The girl he talked to was named Gladys. He liked
the looks of the other one, whose name was Olive, better,
but Ike got next to her first. They stayed on deck kidding
and giggling until the girls said they were cold, then they
went in the saloon and sat on a sofa and Ike went and
bought a box of candy.
     “We ate onions for dinner today,” said Olive. “Hope
you fellers don’t mind. Gladys, I told you we oughtn’t

 to of eaten them onions, not before cornin’ on the boat.”
     “Gimme a kiss an’ I’ll tell ye if I mind or not,” said

 Ike.
     “Kiddo, you can’t talk fresh like that to us, not on this

                                                                                 73

91
boat/’ snapped Olive, two mean lines appearing on eithct
side of her mouth.
             have to be awful careful what we do on the boat/*
explained Gladys. “They’re terrible suspicious of two
girls travelin’ alone nowadays. Ain’t it a crime?”
    “It sure is.” Ike moved up a little closer on the seat.
    “Quit that . . . Make a noise like a hoop an’ roll away.

I mean it.” Olive went and sat on the opposite bench.
Ike followed her.
    “In the old days it was liberty hall on these boats, but
not so any more,” Gladys said, talking to Mac in a low
intimate voice. “You fellers been workin’ up in the
canneries?”
    “No, we been workin’ for the C.P.R. all summer.”
   “You must have made big money.” As she talked to
him, Mac noticed that she kept looking out of the corner
of her eye at her friend.
   “Yare , . . not so big ... I saved up pretty near a
cenrury.”
    “An’ now you’re going to Seattle.”
    “I want to get a job linotypist.”
    “That’s where we live, Seattle. Olive an’ I’ve got an
apartment . .    , Let’s go out on deck, it’s too hot in
here.”
   As they passed Olive and Ike, Gladys leaned over and
whispered something in Olive’s ear. Then she turned to
Mac with a melting smile. The deck was deserted. She
let him put his arm round her waist. His fingers felt the
bones of some sort of corset. He squeezed. “Oh, don’t
be too rough, kiddo,” she whined in a funny little voice.
He laughed. As he took his hand away he felt the con-
tour of her breast. Walking, his leg brushed against her
leg. It was the first time he’d been so close to a girl.
    After a while she said she had to go to bed. “How
a>Dout me goin’ down with ye?” She shook her head. “Not
on this boat. See you tomorrowj maybe you and your

         74

92
pal ’ll come and see us at our apartment. We’ll show yov
the town.” “Sure,” said Mac. He walked on round the
deck, his heart beating hard. He could feel the pound of
the steamboat^s engines and the arrowshaped surge of
broken water from the bow and he felt like that. He
met Ike.
    “My girl said she had to go to bed.” “So did mlne.^
“Get anywheres, Mac?” “They got an apartment in
Seattle.” “I got a kiss off mine. She’s awful hot. Jez, \
thought she was going to feel me up.” “We’ll get it to
morrow all right.”
    The next day was sunnyj the Seattle waterfront was
sparkling, smelt of lumberyards, was noisy with rattle
of carts and yells of drivers when they got off the boat.
They went to the Y.M.C.A. for a room. They were
through with being laborers and hobos. They were going
to get clean jobs, live decently and go to school nights.
They walked round the city all day, and in the evening
met Olive and Gladys in front of the totempole on Pioneet
Square.
    Things happened fast. They went to a restaurant and
had wine with a big feed and afterwards they went to a
beergarden where there was a band, and drank whiskey-
sours. When they went to the girls’ apartment they took
a quart of whiskey with them and Mac almost dropped

it on the steps and the girls said, “For crissake don’t make
so much noise or you’ll have the cops on us,” and the
apartment smelt of musk and facepowder and there was
women’s underwear around on all the chairs and the girls
got fifteen bucks out of each of them first thing. Mac was
in the bathroom with his girl and she smeared liprouge
on his nose and they laughed and laughed until he got
rough and she slapped his face. Then they all sat together
round the table and drank some more and Ike danced a
Solomeydance in his bare feet. Mac laughed, it was so
very funny, but he was sitting on the floor and when

93
tried to get up he fell on his face and all of a sudden he
was being sick m the bathtub and Gladys was cursing hell
out of him. She got him dressed, only he couldn^t find
his necktie, and everybody said he was too drunk and
pushed him out and he was walking down the street sing-
ing Make a Notse Like a Hoof and Just Roll Away^
Roll Awajy and he asked a cop where the Y.M.C.A. was
and the cop pushed him into a cell at the stationhouse and
locked him up.
    He woke up with his head like a big split millstone.
There was vomit on his shirt and a rip m his pants. He
went over all his pockets and couldn’t find his pocketbook.
A cop opened the cell door and told him to make himself
scarce and he walked out into the dazzling sun that cut
into his eyes like a knife. The man at the desk at the Y
looked at him queerly when he went in, but he got up to
his room and fell into bed without anybody saying any-
thing to him. Ike wasn’t back yet. He dozed off feeling
his headache all through his sleep. When he woke up
Ike was sitting on the bed. Ike’s eyes were bright and his
cheeks were red. He was still a little drunk. ^^Say, Mac,
did they roll yer? I can’t find my pocketbook an’ I tned
to go back but I couldn’t find the apartment. God, I’d
have beat up the goddam floosies . . . Shit, I’m drunk
as a pissant still. Say, the galoot at the desk said we’d
have to clear out. Can’t have no drunks in the Y.M.C.A.”
^‘But jez, we paid for a week.” ^^He’ll give us part of it
back .     . Aw, what the hell, Mac .         .  . We’re flat, but
I feel swell . . . Say, I had a rough time with your Jane
after they’d thrown you out.”

 ^‘Hell, I feel sick as a dog.”
    “I’m afraid to go to sleep for fear of getting a hang-
over. Come on out, it’ll do you good.”
     It was three in the afternoon. They went into a little
Chinese restaurant on the waterfront and drank coffee.
T’hey had two dollars they got from hocking their suit-

         76

94
cases. The pawnbroker wouldn’t take the silk shirts be-
cause they were dirty. Outside it was raining pitchforks.
    “Jesus, why the hell didn’t we have the sense to keep
sober? God, we’re a couplaljig stiffs, Ike.”
    “We had a good party . . . Jez, you looked funny
with that liprouge all over your face.”
    “I feel like hell ... I wanta study an’ work for
things} you know what I mean, not to get to be a god-
dam slavedriver but for socialism and the revolution an’
like that, not work an’ go on a bat an’ work an’ go on a
bat like those damn yaps on the railroad.”
    “Hell, another time we’ll have more sense an’ leave
our wads somewhere safe . . . Gee, I’m begmning to
sink by the bows myself.”
    “If the damn house caught fire I wouldn’t have the
strength to walk out.”
    They sat in the Chink place as long as they could and
then they went out in the rain to find a tMrtycent flop-'
house where they spent the night, and the bedbugs ate
them up. In the morning they went round looking for
jobs, Mac in the printing trades and Ike at the shipping
agencies. They met in the evening without having had
any luck and slept in the park as it was a fine , night
Eventually they both signed up to go to a lumbercamp
up the Snake River. They were sent up by the agency or'
a car full of Swedes and Finns. Mac and Ike were thf
only ones who spoke English. When they got there they
found the foreman so hardboiled and the grub so rotten
and the bunkhouse so filthy that they lit out at the end
of a couple of days, on the bum again. It was already cold
in the Blue Mountains and they would have starved to
death if they hadn’t been able to beg food in the cook-
houses of lumbercamps along the way. They hit the, rail-
road at Baker City, managed to b^t their way back t(i
Portland on freights. In Portland they couldn’t find jcfl)*

becatee^their clothes were so cfirty, so they hiked soutfe'

                                                                                 77

95
veard along a big endless Oregon valley full of fruit-
ranches, sleeping in barns and getting an occasional meal
by cutting wood or doing chores around a ranch house.
    In Salem, Ike found that he had a dose and Mac
couldn’t sleep nights worrying for fear he might have it
too. They tried to go to a doctor in Salem. He was a big
roundfaced man with a hearty laugh. When they said
they didn’t have any money he guessed it was all right
and that they could do some chores to pay for the con-
sultation, but when he heard it was a venereal disease he
threw them out with a hot lecture on the wages of sin.
    They trudged along the road, hungry and footsore 5
Ike had fever and it hurt him to walk. Neither of them
said anything. Finally they got to a small fruitshipping
Station where there were watertanks, on the main line of
^he Southern Pacific. There Ike said he couldn’t walk
any further, that they’d have to wait for a freight. Jesus
Christ, jail ’ud be better than this.”
    ^When you’re outa luck in this man’s country, you
certainly are outa luck,” said Mac and for some reason
they both laughed.
    Among the bushes back of the station they found an
 old tramp boiling coffee in a tin can. He gave them some
 coffee and bread and baconrind and they told him their
 troubles. He said he was headed south for the winter and
 that the ihmg to cure it up was tea made out of cherry

 pits, and stems, “But where the hell am I going to get
 cherry pits and sterns*^” Anyway he said not to worry,
 k was no worse than a bad cold. He was a cheerful old
 man with a face so grimed with dirt it looked like a brown
 leather mask. He was going to take a chance on a freight

 chat- stopped there to water a little after sundown. Mac
  iozed off to sleep while Ike and the old man talked.
 When he woke up Ike was yelling at him and they were

 ail running for the freight that had already started. In
 the dark Mac missed his footing and fell flat on the ties.

          78

96
He wrenched his knee and ground cinders into his nose
and by the time he had got to his feet all he could see
were the two lights on the end of the train fading into
the November haze.
    That was the last he saw of Ike Hall.
    He got himself back on the road and limped along until
he came to a ranch house. A dog barked at him and
worried his ankles but he was too down and out to care.
Finally a stout woman came to the door and gave him
some cold biscuits and applesauce and told him he could
sleep in the barn if he gave her all his matches. He limped
to the bam and snuggled into a pile of dry sweetgrasi
and went to sleep.
    In the morning the rancher, a tall ruddy man named
Thomas, with a resonant voice, went over to the barn and
offered him work for a few days at the price of his board
and lodging. They were kind to him, and had a pretty
daughter named Mona that he kinder fell in love with.
She was a plump rosycheeked girl, strong as a boy and
afraid of nothing. She punched him and wrestled with
          and, particularly after he’d gotten fattened up a
him 5
little and rested, he could hardly sleep nights for think-
ing of her. He lay in his bed of sweetgrass telling ovei
the touch of her bare arm that rubbed along his when
she handed him back the nozzle of the sprayer for the
fruittrees, or was helping him pile up the pruned twigs to
burn, and the roundness of her breasts and her breath
sweet as a cow’s on his neck when they romped and played
tricks on each other evenings after supper. But the
Thomases had other ideas for their daughter and told
Mac that they didn’t need him any more. They sent him
off kindly with a lot of good advice, some old dothes and
a cold lunch done up in newspaper, but no money. Mona
ran after him as he walked off down the dustyrutted
wagonroad and kissed him right in front of her parents.
'T’m stuck on you,” she said. “You make a lot of money

                                                                                 79

97
and come back and marry me.”             gum, Pll do that,”
3aid Mac, and he walked off with tears in his eyes and
feeling very good. He was particularly glad he hadn^t
got the clap off that girl in Seattle.



                                                       NEWSREEL VI


        Paris Shocked At Last

         HARRIMAN SHOWN AS RAIL COLOSSUS

        noted swindler run to earth

                    TEDDY WIELDS BIG STICK

        straphangers demand relief.

            We were sailing along
                               On moonlight bay
            You can hear the voices ringing
            They seem to say
            You have stolen my hearty now don^t go away
            Just as we sang
                               lovers
                                     old
                                           sweet
                                                 songs
                               On moonlight bay

                MOB LYNCHES AFTER PRAYER
        when the metal poured out of the furnace I saw the men
running to a place of safety. To the right of the furnace I
saw a party of ten men all of them running wildly and their
clothes a mass of flames. 'Apparently some of them had been
injured when the explosion occurred and several of them
tripped and; fell., The hot metal ran over the poor men in a
moment.

          PRAISE MONOPOLY AS BOON TO ALL
         8o

98
industrial foes work for peace at Mrs. Potter Palmers
                               lovers
                                     old
                                           sweet
                                                song
            We were sailing along
                                on moonlight bay



                               THE CAMERA EYE (7)


       skating on the pond next the silver company's mills

where there was a funny fuzzy smell from the dump

whaleoil soap somebody said it was that they used in

cleaning the silver knives and spoons and forks putting

shine on them for sale       there was shine on the ice early

black ice that rang like a sawblade just scratched white by

the first skaters       I couldn’t learn to skate and kept fall-

ing down         look out for the muckers everybody said

bohunk and polak kids put stones in their snowballs writfe

dirty words up on walls do dirty things up alleys their

folks work in the mills

        we clean young American Rover Boys handy with

tools Deerslayers played hockey Boy Scouts and cut figure

eights on the ice Achilles Ajax Agamemnon I couldn’j:

learn to skate and kept falling down

99
                                                —

                              THE PLANT WIZARD


       Luther Burbank was born in a brick farmhouse in
Lancaster Mass,
       he walked round the woods one winter
       crunching through the shinycrusted snow
       stumbled into a little dell where a warm spring
Wras
       and found the grass green and weeds sprouting
       and skunk cabbage pushing up a potent thumb,
       He went home and sat by the stove and read
Darwin
       Struggle for Existence Origin of Species Natural
       Selection that wasn’t what they taught in church,
       so Luther Burbank ceased to believe moved to
I<unenburg,
        found a seedball in a potato plant
        sowed the seed and cashed in on Mr. Darwin’s
Natural
        Selection
        on Spencer and Huxley
        with the Burbank Potato.


        Young man go west;
        I.uther Burbank went to Santa Rosa
        full of his dream of green grass in winter ever-
        blooming flowers ever-
                                  Luther Burbank
        bearing berries j
        could cash in on Natural Selection Luther Bur-
bank
        carried his apocalyptic dream of green grass in
winter
        and seedless berries and stoneless plums and
thornless roses brambles cactus
        82

100
                winters were bleak in that bleak
                brick farmhouse in bleak Massachusetts-
        out to sunny Santa Rosa;
        and he was a sunny old man
        where roses bloomed all year
        everblooming everbearing
        hybrids.



        America was hybrid
        America should cash in on Natural Selection.
        He was an infidel he believed in Darwin arid
Natural
        Selection and the influence of the mighty dead
        and a good firm shipper’s fruit
        suitable for canning.
        He was one of the grand old men until tne
churches
        and the congregations
        got wind that he was an infidel and believed
        in Darwin.
        Luther Burbank had never a thought of evil,
        selecting improved hybrids for America
        those sunny years in Santa Rosa.
        But he brushed down a wasp’s nest that time;
        he wouldn’t give up Darwin and Natural Selection
        and they stung him and he died
        puzzled.
        They buried him under a cedartree.
        His favorite photograph
        was of a little tot
        standing beside a bed of hybrid
        everblooming double Shasta daisies
        with never a thought of evil
        And Mount Shasta

                                                                                 83

101
        in the background, used to be a volcano
        but they don’t have volcanos
        any more.


                                                    NEWSREEL VII


   SAYS THIS IS CENTURY WHERE BILLIONS AND BRAINS ARE
                                        TO RULE

       infant born in Minneapolis comes here in incubator

                               Cheyenne Cheyenne
                               Hof on my fony

&ays Jim Hill hits oil trust on 939 counts

          BIG FOUR TRAIN BLOWN TO PIECES
       woman and children blotted out admits he saw floggings
and even mutilations but no frightful outrages

     TRUTH ABOUT THE CONGO FREE STATE

        Find Bad Fault In Dreadnaught Santos Dumont tells ol
rival of bird of prey wives prime aim of Congo natives ex-
traordinary letter ordering away U.S. marines

        WHITES IN CONGO LOSE MORAL SENSE
        WOMAN HELD A CAPTIVE BY AMBULANCE CHASERS

                   Thaw Faces Judge in Fateful Fight

                  LABOR MENACE IN POLITICS

        last of Salome seen in New York heroism of mother un**
availing

           There^s room here /or       dear^
                   But after the ceremony
           Two, dear, as one, dear, will ride back on my fony
                  From old Cheyenne
         $4

102
                               THE CAMERA EYE (8)


       you sat on the bed unlacing your shoes Hey

Frenchie yelled Tylor in the door youH^e got to fighfi

the Kid          doan wanna fight him           gotto fight him

hasn’t he got to fight him fellers? Freddie pushed his

face through the crack in the door and made a long nose

Gotta fight him umpyaya and all the fellows on the top

floor were there if not you ’re a girlboy and I had oft

my pyjamas and they pushed in the Edd and the Kid

hit Frenchie and Frenchie hit the Kid and your mouth

tasted bloody and everybody yelled Go it Kid except

Gummer and he yelled Bust his jaw Jack and Frenchie

had the Kid down on the bed and everybody pulled hina

off and they all had Frenchie against the door and he

was slamming right an’ left and he couldn’t see who was

hitting him and everybody started to yell the Kid licked

him and Tylar and Freddy held his arms and told the

Kid to come and hit him but the Kid wouldn’t and the

Kid was crying

        the bloody sweet puky taste and then the bell rang

for lights and everybody ran to their rooms and you got

into bed with your head throbbing and you were crying

when Gumnxer tiptoed in an’ said you had him licked

Jack it was a fucking shame it was Freddy hit you that

                                                                                 8s

103
time;, but Hoppy was tiptoeing round the hall and caught
Gummer trying to get back to his room and he got his



                                                                                  MAC


    By Thanksgiving Mac had beaten his way to Sacra-
mento, where he got a job smashing crates in a dried
fruit warehouse. By the first of the year he’d saved up
enough to buy a suit of dark clothes and take the steam-
boat down the river to San Francisco.
    It was around eight in the evening when he got in.
With his suitcase in his hand, he walked up Market Street
from the dock. The streets were full of lights. Young
tatn and pretty girls in brightcolored dresses were walk-
ing fast through a big yanking wind that fluttered dresses
and scarfs, slapped color into cheeks, blew grit and papers
into the air. There were Chinamen, Wops, Portuguese,
Japs in the streets. People were hustling to shows and
restaurants. Music came out of the doors of bars, frying,
buttery foodsmells from restaurants, smells of winecasks
 and beer. Mac wanted to go on a party but he only had
 four dollars so he went and got a room at the Y and ate
 some soggy pie and coffee in the deserted cafeteria down-

 ii>tairs.
     When he got up in the bare bedroom like something In
 a hospital he opened the window, but it only gave on an
 airshaft. The room smelt of some sort of cleaning fluid
 and when he lay down on the bed the blanket smelt of
 formaldehyde. He felt too well. He could feel the pranc-
 ing blood steam all through him. He wanted to talk to
 somebody, to go to a dance or have a drink with a fellow
 he knew or kid a girl somewhere. The smell of rouge and

          86

104
musky facepowder in the room of those girls in Seattle
came back to him. He got up and sat on the edge of the
bed swinging his legs. Then he decided to go out, but
before he went he put his money in his suitcase and locked
It up. Lonely as a ghost he walked up and down the
streets until he was deadtiredj he walked fast not looking
to the right or left, brushing past painted girls at street-
corners, touts that tried to put addresscards into his hand^
drunks that tried to pick fights with him, panhandlers
whining for a handout. Then, bitter and cold and tired,
he went back to his room and fell into bed.
    Next day he went out and got a job in a small prints
shop run and owned by a baldheaded Italian with big
whiskers and a flowing black tie, named Bonello. Bonello
told him he had been a redshirt with Garibaldi and was
                                                                               he hired
now an anarchist. Ferrer was his great hero 5
Mac because he thought he might make a convert out of
him. All that winter Mac worked at Bonello’s, ate
spaghetti and drank red wine and talked revolution with
him and his friends in the evening, went to Socialist pio-
nics or libertarian meetings on Sundays. Saturday nights
he went round to whorehouses with a fellow named
Miller whom heM met at the Y. Miller was studying to
be a dentist. He got to be friends with a girl named
Maisie Spencer who wortpd in the millinery department
at the Emporium. Sundays she used to try to get him
to go to church. She was a quiet girl with big blue eyes
that she turned up to him with an unbelieving smile when
he talked revolution to her. She had tiny regular pearly
teeth and dressed prettily. After a while she got so that
she did not bother him so much about church. She liked

to have him take her to hear the band play at the Presidio
or to look at the statuary in Sutro Park.
    The morning of the earthquake Mac^s first thought,
when he got over his own terrible scare, was for Maisie.
The house where her folks lived on Mariposa Street wa^

                                                                                 87

105
still standing when he got thercj but everyone had cleared
out. It was not till the third day, three days of smoke
and crashing timbers and dynamiting he spent working in
a firefighting squad, that he found her in a provision line
at the entrance to Golden Gate Park. The Spencers were
living in a tent near the shattered greenhouses.
    She didn^t recognise him because his hair and eye-
brows were singed and his clothes were in tatters and he
was soot from head to foot. He^d never kissed her be-
 fore, but he took her in his arms before everybody and
kissed her. When he let her go her face was all sooty
from his. Some of the people in the line laughed and
dapped, but the old woman right behind, who had her
 hair done in a pompadour askew so that the rat showed
through and who wore two padded pink silk dressing
 gowns one above the other said spitefully, “Now you^ll
 have to go and wash your face.”
    After that they considered themselves engaged, but
 they couldn’t get married, because Bonello’s printshop
 had been gutted with the rest of the block it stood in, and
 Mac was out of a job. Maisie used to let him kiss her and
 hug her in dark doorways when he took her home at
 night, but further than that he gave up trying to go.
     In the fall he got a job on the Bulletin. That was night
 work and he hardly ever saw Maisie except Sundays, but
 they began to talk about getting married after Christmas.
 When he was away from her he felt somehow sore at
 Maisie most of the time, but when he was with her he
 melted absolutely. He tried to get her to read pamphlets
 on socialism, but she laughed and looked up at him with
 her big intimate blue eyes and said it was too deep for
 her. She liked to go to the theater and eat in restaurants
 where the linen was starched and there were waiters in
 dress suits.
     About that time he went one night to hear Upton Sin-
  dair speak about the Chicago stockyards. Next to him was
          88

106
a young man in dungarees. He had a nose like a hawk and
gray eyes and deep creases under his cheekbones and
talked m a slow drawl. His name was Fred Hoff. After
the lecture they went and had a beer together and talked,
Fred Hoff belonged to the new revolutionary organiza-
tion called The Industrial Workers of the World. He
read Mac the preamble over a second glass of beer. Fred
Hoff had just hit town as donkeyengine man on a
freighter. He was sick of the bum griib and hard life on
the sea. He still had his pay in his pocket and he was
bound he wouldn^t blow it in on a bust. He^d heard that
there was a miners^ strike in Goldfield and he thought
he^d go up there and see what he could do. He made Mac
feel that he was leading a pretty stodgy life helping print

lies against the working class. ^^Godalmighty, man, you’re
just the kind o’ stuff we need out there. We’re goin’ to
publish a paper in Goldfield, Nevada.”
    That night Mac went round to the local and filled out
a card, and went home to his boarding house with his
head swimming. I was just on the point of selling out to
the sons of bitches, he said to himself.
    The next Sunday he and Maisie had been planning to
go up the Scenic Railway to the top of Mount Tamalpais.
Mac was terribly sleepy when his alarmclock got him out
of bed. They had to start early because he had to be qn
the job again that night. As he walked to the ferrystation
where he was going to meet her at nine the clank of the
presses was still in his head, and the sour smell of ink and
paper bruised under the presses, and on top of that the
smell of the hall of the house he’d been in with a coupk
of the fellows, the smell of moldy rooms and sloppails
and the small of armpits and the dressmgtable of the
frizzyhaired girl he’d had on the clammy bed and the

taste of the stale beer they’d drunk and the cooing me^
dbanical voice, “Goodnight, dearie, come round soon.”
    “God, I’m a swine,” he said to himself.

                                                                                 99

107
   1^ or once it was a clear morning, all the colors in the
street shone like bits o£ glass. God, he was sick of whor-
ing round. If Maisie would only be a sport, if Maisie w^as
only a rebel you could talk to like you could to a friend.
And how the hell was he going to tell her he was throw-
ing up his job?
    She was waiting for him at the ferry looking like a
Gibson girl with her neat sailorblue dress and picture bat.
They didn’t have time to say anything as they had to run
for the ferry. Once on the ferryboat she lifted up her face
to be kissed. Her lips were cool and her gloved hand
rested so lightly on his. At Sausalito they took the trolley-
car and changed and she kept smiling at him when they
ran to get good places in the scenic car and they felt so
alone in the roaring immensity of tawny mountain and
blue sky and sea. They’d never been so happy together.
She ran ahead of him all the way to the top. At the ob-
servatory they were both breathless. They stood against a
wall out of sight of the other people and she let him kiss
her all over her face, all over her face and neck.
    Scraps of mist flew past cutting patches out of their
view of the bay and the valleys and the shadowed moun-
tains. When they went round to the seaward side an icy
wind was shrilling through everything. A churning mass
of fog was welling up from the sea like a tidal wave. She
gripped his arm. “Oh, this scares me, Fainy!” Then sud-
denly he told her that he’d given up his job. She looked
up at him frightened and shivering in the cold wind and
                                tears began to run down either side oi
 little and helpless j
 her nose. “But I thought you loved me, Fenian       .  . . Dc
 you think it’s been easy for me waitin’ for you all this
 time, wantin’ you and lovin’ you^^ Oh, I thought you
 loved me’”
     He put his arm round her. He couldn’t say anything.
  They started walking towards the gravity car.

         90

108
    “I don’t want all those people to see IVe been crying,
We were so happy before. Let’s walk down to Muir
                                                                                  I want
Woods.” ^^It’s pretty far, Maisie.”           don’t care 5
to.” ^^Gee, you’re a good sport, Maisie.” They started
down the footpath and the mist blotted out everything.
    After a couple of hours they stopped to rest. They left
the path and found a patch of grass in the middle of a big
thicket of cistus. The mist was all around but it was bright
overhead and they could feel the warmth of the sun
through it. ^^Ouch, I’ve got blisters,” she said and made
a funny face that made him laugh. ^Tt can’t be so awfuJ
far now,” he saidj ^^honest, Maisie.” He wanted to explain
to her about the strike and the wobblies and why he was
going to Goldfield, but he couldn’t. All he could do was
kiss her. Her mouth clung to his lips and her arms were
tight round his neck.
    ^^Honest, it won’t make any difference about our gettin^
                honest, it won’t ,     . . Maisie, I’m crazy about
married 3
you  .  .  Maisie, do let me ... You must let me             . . .
Honest, you don’t know how terrible it is for me, lovin’
you like this and you never lettin’ me.”
    He got up and smoothed down her dress. She lay there
with her eyes closed and her face whitej he was afraid she
had fainted. He kneeled down and kissed her gently on
the cheek. She smiled ever so little and pulled his head
down and ruffled his hair. ‘^Little husband,” she said.
After a while they got to their feet and walked through
the redwood grove, without seeing it, to the trolleystatioa
Going home on the ferry they decided they’d get married
inside of the week. Mac promised not to go to Nevada.
    Next morning he got up feeling depressed. He was
selling out. When he was shaving in the bathroom he
looked at himself in the mirror and said, half aloud: ^^You
bastard, you’re selling out to the sons of bitches.”
    He went back to his room and wrote Maisie a letter.

                                                                                 91

109
Dear Maisie:
   Honestly you mustn’t think for one minute I don’t
love you ever so much, but I promised to go to Goldfield
to help the gang run that paper and I’ve got to do it. I’ll
send you my address as soon as I get there and if you
really need me on account of anything. I’ll come right
back, honestly I will.
                                      A whole lot of kisses and love
                                                                                Fainy

    He went down to the Bulletin ofEce and drew his pay,
packed his bag and went down to the station to see when
he could get a train for Goldfield, Nevada.



                                THE CAMERA EYE (9)


        all day the fertilixerfactories smelt something awful

ind at night the cabin was full of mosquitoes fit to carry

pou away but it was Crisfield on the Eastern Shore and if

tve had a gasoline boat to carry them across the bay here w^

could ship our tomatoes and corn and early peaches ship

’em dear to New York instead of being jipped by the

commissionmerchants in Baltimore we’d run a truck farm

ship early vegetables irrigate fertilize enrich the tobacco-

exhausted land of the Northern Neck if we had a gasoline

boat we’d run oysters in her in winter raise terrapin for

the market

        but up on the freight siding I got talking to a young

guy couldn’t have been much older ’n me was asleep in

         9a

110
one of the boxcars asJeep right there in the sun and the

smell of cornstalks and the reek of rotting menhaden

from the fertilizer factories             he had curly hair and

wisps of hay in it and through his open shirt you could see

his body was burned brown to the waist I guess he wasn’t

much account but he’d bummed all way from Minnesota

he was going south and when I told him about Chesa-

peake Bay he wasn’t surprised but said I guess it’s too fur

to swim it I’ll git a job in a menhaden boat




                                                                     BIG BILI


        Big Bill Haywood was born in sixty nine in a
boardinghouse in Salt Lake City.
        He was raised in Utah, got his schooling in Ophir
a mining camp with shooting scrapes, faro Saturday
nights, whisky spilled on pokertables piled with new
silver dollars.
        When he was eleven his mother bound him out
to a farmer, he ran away because the farmer lashed
him with a whip. That was his first strike.
        He lost an eye whittling a slingshot out of scrub-
oak.
        He worked for storekeepers, ran a frultstand,
ushered in the Salt Lake Theatre, was a messengerboy,
bellhop at the Continental Hotel.
        When he was fifteen
        he went out to the mines in Humboldt County,
Nevada,

                                                                                 93

111
               ;



       his outfit was overalls, a jumper, a blue shirt,
mining boots, two pair of blankets, a set of chessmen,
boxinggloves and a big lunch of plum pudding his
mother fixed for him.
       When he married he went to live in Fort Mc-
Dermitt built in the old days against the Indians,
abandoned now that there was no more frontier;
       there his wife bore their first baby without doctor
or midwife. Bill cut the navelstring. Bill buried the
afterbirth
        the child lived. Bill earned money as he could
surveying, haying in Paradise Valley, breaking colts,
riding a wide rangy country.
        One night at Thompson’s Mill, he was one of five
men who met by chance and stopped the night in the
abandoned ranch. Each of them had lost an eye, they
were the only oneeyed men in the county.
        They lost the homestead, things went to pieces,
his wife was sick, he had children to support. He went
to work as a miner at Silver City.
        At Silver City, Idaho, he joined the W.F.M.,
there he-«held his first union office; he was delegate of
the Silver City miners to the convention of the West-
ern Federation of Miners held in Salt Lake City in ’98.
        From then on he was an organizer, a speaker, an
exhorter, the wants of all the miners were his wants;
 he fought Coeur D’Alenes, Telluride, Cripple Creek,
        joined the Sodalist Party, wrote and spoke
 through Idaho, Utah, Nevada, Montana, Colorado to
 miners striking for an eight hour day, better living, a
 share of the wealth they hacked out of the hills.


         In Chicago in January 1905 a conference was
 called that met at the same hall in Lake Street where
         94

112
the Chicago anarchists had addressed meetings twenty
years before.
        William D. Haywood was permanent chairman.
It was this conference that wrote the manifesto that
brought into being the I.W.W.
        When he got back to Denver he was kidnapped
to Idaho and tried with Moyer and Pettibone for the
murder of the sheepherder Steuenberg, exgovernor of
Idaho, blown up by a bomb in his own home.
        When they were acquitted at Boise (Darrow was
their lawyer) Big Bill Haywood was known as a
workingclass leader from coast to coast.
        Now the wants of all the workers were his wants,
he was the spokesman of the West, of the cowboys and
the lumberjacks and the harvesthands and the miners.
         (The steamdrill had thrown thousands of miners
out of work5 the steamdrill had thrown a scare into all
the miners of the West.)
        The W.F.M. was going conservative. Haywood
worked with the I.W.W. budding a new society in the
shell of the old, campaigned for 'Debs for President in
1908 on the Red Special. He was in on all the big
strikes in the East where revolutionary spirit was grow-
ing, Lawrence, Paterson, the strike of the Minnesota
ironworkers.
         They went over with the A.E.F. to save the Mor-
gan loans, to save Wilsonian Democracy, they stood at
Napoleon’s tomb and dreamed empire, they had cham-
pagne cocktails at the Ritz bar and slept with Russian
countesses in Montmartre and dreamed empire, all
over the country at American legion posts and business
men’s luncheons it was worth money to make the eagle
scream j
         they lynched the pacifists and the proGermans
and the wobblies and the reds and the bolsheviks.

                                                                                 95

113
        Bill Haywood stood trial with the hundred and
one at Chicago where Judge Landis the baseball czar
        with the lack of formality of a traffic court
        handed out his twenty year sentences and thirty-
thousand dollar fines.
        After two years in Leavenworth they let them
bail out Big Bill (he was fifty years old a heavy broken
man), the war was over but they’d learned empire in
the Hall of the Mirrors at Versailles;
        the courts refused a new trial.
        It was up to Haywood to jump his bail or to go
back to prison for twenty years.
         He was sick with diabetes, he had had a rough
life, prison had broken down his health. Russia was
a workers’ republic; he went to Russia and was in
Moscow a couple of years but he wasn’t happy there,
that woi'ld was too strange for him. He died there
and they burned his big broken hulk of a body and
buried the ashes under the Kremlin wall.


                             THE CAMERA EYE (lo)


         the old major who used to take me to the Capitol

 when the Senate and the House of Representatives were

 in session had been in the commissary of the Confederate
 Army and had very beautiful manners so the attendants

 bowed to the old major except for the pages who were

 little boys not much older than your brother was a page

 in the Senate once and occasionally a Representative or a

 Senator would look at him with slit eyes may be some-

 body and bow or shake hearty or raise a hand

          9^

114
        the old major dressed very well ifi a morningcoat

and had muttonchop whiskers and we would walk very

slowly through the flat sunlight in the Botanical Gardens

and look at the little labels on the trees and shrubs and

see the fat robins and the starlings hop across the grass

and walk up the steps and through the flat air of the

rotunda with the dead statues of different sizes and the

Senate Chamber flat red and the committee room and the

House flat green and the committee rooms and the Su-

preme Court IVe forgotten what color the Supreme Court

was and the committee rooms

        and whispering behind the door of the visitors^ gah

lery and the dead air and a voice rattling under the glass

skylights and desks slammed and the long corridors full

of the dead air and our legs would get very tired and I

thought of the starlings on the grass and the long streets

full of dead air and my legs were tired and I had a pain

between the eyes and the old men bowing with quick slit

eyes

        may be somebody and big slit unkind mouths and

the dusty black felt and the smell of coatclosets and dead

air and I wonder what the old major thought about and

what' I thought about maybe about that big picture at thft

 Corcoran Art Gallery full of columns and steps and con

 spirators and Caesar in purple fallen flat called Caesa^r

 dead

                                                                                  97

115
                                                                                  MAC


    Mac had hardly gotten off the train at Goldfield when
a lanky man m khaki shirt and breeches, wearing canvas
army leggins, went up to him.          you don’t mind, what’s
your business in this town, brother?” “I’m travelin’ m
books.” “What kinda books?” “Schoolbooks and the like,
for Truthseeker, Inc. of Chicago.” Mac rattled it off very
fast, and the man seemed impressed. “I guess you’re all
right,” he said. “Going up to the Eagle?” Mac nodded.
“Plug’ll take ye up, the feller with the team ... You
see we’re looking out for these goddam agitators, the I
Won’t Work outfit.”
    Outside the Golden Eagle Hotel there were two sol-
diers on guard, toughlooking sawedoff men with their hats
over their eyes. When Mac went in everybody at the bar
turned and looked at him. He said “Good evening,
 gents,” as snappily as possible and went up to the pro-
 prietor to ask for a room. All the while he was wondering
 who the hell he dared ask where the office of the Nevada
 Workman was. “I guess I can fix you up with a bed.
 Travelin’ man?” “Yes,” said Mac. “In books.” Down at
 the end a big man with walrus whiskers was standing at
 the bar talking fast in a drunken whining voice, “If they’d
 only give me my head Pd run the bastards outa town soon
 enough. Too goddam many lawyers mixed up in this. Run
 the sonsobitches out. If they resists shoot ’em, that’s what
 I says to the Governor, but they’re all these sonsobitches
 a lawyers fussin’ everythin’ up all the time with warrants
 and habeas corpus and longwinded rigmarole. My ass to
 habeas corpus.” “All right, Joe, you tell ’em,” said the
  proprietor soothingly. Mac bought a cigar and sauntered
  but. As the door closed behind him the big man was yell-
  ing out again, “I said. My ass to habeas corpus.”
      It was nearly dark. An icy wind blew through the ram-

          98

116
shackle clapboard streets. His feet stumbling in the mud
of the deep ruts, Mac walked round several blocks look-
ing up at dark windows. He walked all over the town
but no sign of a newspaper office. When he found himself
passing the same Chink hashjoint for the third time, he
slackened his steps and stood irresolutely on the curb. Av
the end of the street the great jagged shank of a hill hung
over the town. Across the street a young man, his head
and ears huddled into the collar of a mackinaw, was loaf-
ing against the dark window of a hardware store. Mac
decided he was a squarelooking stiff and went over to
speak to him.
    ^^Say, bo, where’s the office of the Nevada Worhman?^^
“What the hell d’you wanter know for?” Mac and the
other man looked at each other. “I want to see Fred
Hoff ... I came on from San Fran to help in the
printirf.” “Got a red card?” Mac pulled out his I.W.W,
membership card. “Pve got my union card, too, if you
want to see that.”
    “Hell, no ... I guess you’re all right, but, as the
feller said, suppose I’d been a dick, you’d be in the bull
pen now, bo.”
    “I told ’em I was a friggin’ bookagent to get into the
damn town. Spent my last quarter on a cigar to keep up
the burjwa look.”
    The other man laughed. ^^All right, fellowworker. I’ll
take you round.”
    “What they got here, martial law?” asked Mac as he
followed the man down an alley between two overgrown
shanties.
    “Every sonofabitchin’ yellerleg in the State of Nevada
right here in town . . . Lucky if you don’t get run outa
town with a bayonet in yer crotch, as the feller said.^’
    At the end of the alley was a small house like a shoebox
with brightly lit windows. Young fellows in miners^

clothes or overalls filled up the end of the alley and sm

                                                                                 99

117
three deep on the rickety steps. “What’s this, a pool->
room?” asked Mac. “This is the Nevada Workman .         . .
Say, my name’s Ben Evans; I’ll introjuce you to the
gang . . . Say, yous guys, this is fellowworker Mc-
Creary . . . he’s come on from Frisco to set up type.”
“Put it there, Mac,” said a sixfooter who looked like a
Swede lumberman, and gave Mac’s hand a wrench that
made the bones crack.
    Fred Holf had on a green eyeshade and sat behind a
desk piled with galleys. He got up and shook hands. “Oh,
boy, you’re just in time. There’s hell to pay. They got the
printer in the bullpen and we’ve got to get this sheet out.”
Mac took oflE his coat and went back to look over the
press. He was leaning over the typesetter’s “stone” when
Fred Hoff came back and beckoned him into a corner.
    “Say, Mac, I want to explain the layout here . . . It’s
kind of a funny situation . . . The W.F.M.’s goin’ yel-
low on us . . . It’s a hell of a scrap. The Saint was here
the other day and that bastard Mullany shot him through
both arms and he’s in hospital now . .  They’re sore as
a boil because we’re instillin’ ideas of revolutionary soli-
darity, see? We got the restaurant workers out and we got
 some of the minin’ stiffs. Now the A.F. of L.’s gettin’ wise
 and they’ve got a bonehead scab organizer in hobnobbin’
 with the mineowners at the Montezuma Club.”
     “Hey, Fred, let me take this on gradually,” said Mac,
     “Then there was a little shootin’ the other day out in
 front of a restaurant down the line an’ the stiff that owned
 the joint got plugged an’ now they’ve got a couple of the
 boys in jail for that.” “The hell you say.” “And Big Bill
 Haywood’s cornin’ to speak next week . . . That’s about
 the way the situation is, Mac. I’ve got to tear off an
 article . . . You’re boss printer an’ we’ll pay you seven-
 teen fifty like we all get. Ever written any?”
     “No.”
          lOO

118
    “It^s a time like this a feller regrets he didn’t work
harder in school. Gosh, I wish I could write decent.’’
    ^^Pll take a swing at an article if I get a chance.”
    ^^Big Bill’ll write us some stuff. He writes swell.”
    They set up a cot for Mac back of the press. It was a
week before he could get time to go round to the Eagle
to get his suitcase. Over the office and the presses was a
long attic, with a stove in it, where most of the boys slept*
Those that had blankets rolled up in their blankets, those
that hadn’t put their jackets over their heads, those that
didn’t have jackets slept as best they could. At the end of
the room was a long sheet of paper where someone had
printed out the Preamble in shaded block letters. On the
plaster wall of the office someone had drawn a cartoon of
a workingstiff labelled “I.W.W.” giving a fat man in a
stovepipe hat labelled ^^mineowner” a kick in the seat of
the pants. Above it they had started to letter ^^solidarity’*
but had only gotten as far as O L I D A.”
    One November night Big Bill Haywood spoke at th^
miners’ union. Mac and Fred Hoff went to report th^
speech for the paper. The town looked lonely as an old
trashdump in the huge valley full of shrill wind and driv-
ing snow. The hall was hot and steamy with the steam of
big bodies and plug tobacco and thick mountaineer clothes
that gave off the shanty smell of oil lamps and charred
firewood and greasy fryingpans and raw whisky. At the
beginning of the meeting men moved round uneasily,

shuffling their feet and clearing the phlegm out of their

throats. Mac was uncomfortable himself. In his pocket
was a letter from Maisie. He knew it by heart:

Dearest Fainy:
    Everything has happened just as I was afraid of. You
know what I mean, dearest little husband. It’s two months
already and I’m so frightened and there’s nobody I can

tell. Darling, you must come right back. I’ll die if yov

                                                                               lOI

119
don’t. Honestly I’ll die and I’m so lonely for you any-
ways and so afraid somebody’ll notice. As it is we’ll have
to go away somewheres when we’re married and not come
back until plenty of time has elapsed. If I thought I could
get work there I’d come to you to Goldfield. I think it
would be nice if we went to San Diego. I have friends
there and they say it’s lovely and there we could tell peo-
ple we’d been married a long time. Please come sweetest
little husband. I’m so lonely for you and it’s so terrible to
stand this all alone. The crosses are kisses. Your loving
wife,
                                                                               Maisie
                                                                   xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx

    Big Bill talked about solidarity and sticking together in
the face of the masterclass and Mac kept wondering what
Big Bill would do if he’d got a girl in trouble like that.
Big Bill was saying the day had come to start building a
new society in the shell of the old and for the workers to
get ready to assume control of the industries they’d created
 out of their sweat and blood. When he said, ^We stand
 for the one big union,” there was a burst of cheering and
 clapping from all the wobblies in the hall. Fred Hoff
 nudged Mac as he clapped. ^^Let’s raise the roof, Mac.”
 The exploiting classes would be helpless against the soli-
 darity of the whole working class. The militia and the
 yellowlegs were workingstiffs too. Once they realized the
 historic mission of solidarity the masterclass couldn’t use
 them to shoot down their brothers anymore. The workers
 must realize that every small fight, for higher wages, for
 freespeech, for decent living conditions, was only signifi-
 cant as part of the big fight for the revolution and the
 cooperative commonwealth. Mac forgot about Maisie. By
  the time Big Bill had finished speaking his mind had run
  ahead of the speech so that he’d forgotten just what he
  said, but Mac was in a glow all over and was cheering to
  beat hell. He and Fred Hoff were cheering and the stocky

           102

120
Bohemian miner that smelt so bad next them was clapping
and the oneeyed Pole on the other side was clapping and
the bunch of Wops were clapping and the little Jap who
was waiter at the Montezuma Club was clapping and the
sixfoot ranchman who’d come in in hopes of seeing a fight
was clapping. ^^Ain’t the sonofabitch some orator/’ he was
saying again and again.        tellyer, Utah’s the state for
mansized men. I’m from Ogden myself.”
   After the meeting Big Bill was round at the office and
he joked everybody and sat down and wrote an article
right there for the paper. He pulled out a flask and every-
body had a drink, except Fred Hoff who didn’t like Big
Bill’s drinking, or any drinking, and they all went to bed
with the next issue on the press, feeling tired and flushed
and fine.
    Next morning when Mac woke up he suddenly thought
of Maisie and reread her letter, and tears came to his eyes
sitting on the edge of the cot before anybody was up yet.
He stuck his head in a pail of icy water from the pump,
that was frozen so hard he had to pour a kettleful of hot
water off the stove into it to thaw it, but he couldn’t get
the worried stiff feeling out of his forehead. When hc;
went over with Fred Hoff to the Chink joint for breaks

fast he tried to tell him he was going back to San Fran-
cisco to get married.
                                            we need you here.” “But I’ll
    ^^Mac, you can’t do it 3
come back, honest I will, Fred.” “A man’s first duty’s to
the workin’ class,” said Fred Hoff,
    “As soon as the kid’s born an’ she can go back to work

I’ll come back. But you know how it is, Fred. I can’t pay
the hospital expenses on seventeenfifty a week.”
    “You oughta been more careful.”
    “But hell, Fred, I’m made of flesh and blood like
everybody else. For crissake, what do you want us to be,

tin saints?”

                                                                               103

121
          wobbly oughtn^t to have any wife or children, not
till after the revolution.^’
    “I’m not giving up the fight, Fred        . . . I’m not sellin’
outj I swear to God I’m not.”
    Fred Hoff had gotten very pale. Sucking his lips m be-
tween his teeth he got up from the table and left the res-
taurant. Mac sat there a long time feeling gloomy as hell.
Then he went back to the office of the Workman. Fred
Hoff was at the desk writing hard. “Say, Fred,” said Mac,
“I’ll stay another month. I’ll write Maisie right now.”
“I knew you’d stay, Mac^ you’re no quitter.” “But Jesus
God, man, you expect too much of a feller.” “Too much
is too damn little,” said Fred Hoff. Mac started running
the paper through the press.
    For the next few weeks, when Maisie’s letters came he
put them in his pocket without reading them. He wrote
her as reassuringly as he could, that he’d come as soon as
the boys could get someone to take his place.
    Then Christmas night he read all Maisie’s letters. They
were all the samcj they made him cry. He didn’t want to
get married, but it was hell living up here in Nevada all
winter without a girl, and he was sick of whoring around.
He didn’t want the boys to see him looking so glum, so
he went down to have a drink at the saloon the restaurant
workers went to. A great roaring steam of drunken sing-
ing came out of the saloon. Going in the door he met Ben
Evans. “Hello, Ben, where are you goin’?” “I’m goin’ to
have a drink as the feller said.” “Well, so am I.” “What’s
the matter?” “I’m blue as hell.” Ben Evans laughed.
“Jesus, so am I    . . . and it’s Christmas, ain’t it?”
    They had three drinks each but the bar was crowded
                                                               so they took a pint
and they didn’t feel like celebrating j
flask, which was all they could afford, up to Ben Evans’
room. Ben Evans was a dark thickset young man with
 very black eyes and hair. He hailed from Louisville, Ken-
 tucky. He’d had considerable schooling and was an auto-

        It 04

122
mobile mechanic. The room was icy cold. They sat on th^
bed, each of them wrapped in one of his blankets.
    'Well, ain^t this a way to spend Christmas?” said Mac.
^^Holy Jesus, ids a good thing Fred Hoff didn’t ketch us,”
Mac snickered. ^Tred’s a hell of a good guy, honest as the
day an’ all that, but he won’t let a feller live.”               guess
if the rest of us were more like Fred we’d get somewheres
sooner.” ^We would at that . . . Say, Mac, I’m blue as
hell about all this business, this shootin’ an’ these fellers
from the W.F.M. goin’ up to the Montezuma Club and
playin’ round with that damn scab delegate from Wash-
ington.” ^Well, none of the wobbly crowd’s done any-
thing like that,” ^^No, but there’s not enough of us     .  .
^What you need’s a drink, Ben.” ^Tt’s just like this god-
dam pint, as the feller said, if we had enough of ’em we’d
get fried, but we haven’t. If we had enough boys like
Fred Hoff we’d have a revolution, but we haven’t.”
   They each had a drink from the pint and then Mac
said: ^^Say, Ben, did you ever get a girl in trouble, a girl
you liked a hellova lot?”
    ^^Sure, hundreds of ’em.”
    ^^Didn’t it worry you?”
    ^Tor crissake, Mac, if a girl wasn’t a goddam whore
she wouldn’t let you, would she?”
    ^^Jeez, I don’t see it like that, Ben . . . But hell, I
don’t know what to do about it . .          . She’s a good kid,
anyways, gee . .
         don’t trust none of ’em ... I know a guy onct
married a girl like that, carried on and bawled an’ made
out he’d knocked her up. He married her all right an’ she
turned out to be a goddam whore and he got the siph

off’n her ... You take it from me, boy.           . . . Love ’em
and leave ’em, that’s the only way for stiffs like us.”
    They finished up the pint. Mac went back to the Work-
man office and went to sleep with the whi^ burning in

his stomach. He dreamed he was walking across a field
                                                                               T05

123
\*ith a girl on a warm day. The whisky was hotsweet in
his mouthj buzzed like bees in his ears. He wasn^t sure if
the girl was Maisie or just a goddam whore, but he felt
very warm and tender, and she was saying in a little hot-
sweet voice, ^^Love me up, kid,” and he could see her body
through her thingauze dress as he leaned over her and
^he kept crooning, ^^Love me up, kid,” in a hotsweet buz-
2 ing.
    ^^Hey, Mac, ain\ you ever goin^ to get waked up'^”
Fred Hoff, scrubbing his face and neck with a towel, was
standing over him. “I want to get this place cleaned up
before the gang gets here,” Mac sat up on the cot. “Yare,
what’s the matter?” He didn’t have a hangover but he
felt depressed, he could tell that at once.
    “Say, you certainly were stinkin’ last night.”
    “The hell I was, Fred ... I had a coupla drinks but,
Jesus .  .
     “I heard you staggerin’ round here goin’ to bed like
 any goddam scissorbill.”
    “Look here, Fred, you’re not anybody’s nursemaid. I
 tan take care of myself.”
     “You guys need nursemaids ... You can’t even wait

 till we won the strike before you start your boozin’ and
 whorin’ around.” Mac was sitting on the edge of the bed
 lacing his boots. “What in God’s name do you think we’re
 »11 hangin’ round here for . . , our health?” “I don’t
 know what the hell most of you are hangin’ round for,”
 said Fred Hoff and went out slamming the door.
     A couple of days later it turned out that there was

 a nother fellow around who could run a linotype and Mac
 left town. He sold his suitcase and his good clothes for
 five dollars and hopped a train of flatcars loaded with ore
 that took him down to Ludlow. In Ludlow he washed
 the alkali dust out of his mouth, got a meal and got
 cleaned up a little. He was in a terrible hurry to get to
 Frisco, all the time he kept thinking that Maisie might
 kill herself. He was crazy to see her, to sit beside her, to
          io6

124
have her pat his hand gently while they were sitting side
by side talking the way she used to do. After those bleak
dusty months up in Goldfield he needed a woman. The
fare to Frisco was $11.15            he only had four dollars and
some pennies left. He tried risking a dollar in a crapgamc
in the back of a saloon^ but he lost it right away and got
cold feet and left.


                                                       NEWSREEL VIII



         Prof Ferrer, former director of the Modern School in
Barcelona who has been on trial there on the charge of having
been the principal instigator of the recent revolutionary move-
ment has been sentenced to death and will be shot Wednesday
unless
         Cook still pins faith on esquimaux says interior of th^
Island of Luzon most beautiful place on earth

                 QUIZZES WARM UP POLE TALK
         Oh bury me not on the lone frame
         Where the wild kiyotes will howl over me
         Where the rattlesnakes hiss and the Wind blows jree

         GYPSY’S MARCHERS STORM SIN’S FORT

         Nation’s Big Men Await River Trip Englewood Club'
women Move To Uplift Drama Evangelist’s Host Thousands
Strong Pierces Heart of Crowded Hushed Levee Has $3,018
and Is Arrested

           GIVES MILLION IN HOOKWORM WAR

         Gypsy Smith’s Spectral Parade Through South Side Red
 Light Region
         with a bravery that brought tears to the eyes of the squad
 of twelve men who were detailed to shoot him Francisco
 Ferrer marched this morning to the trench that h^d been
 prepared to receive his body after the fatal volley

                     PLUNGE BY AUTOJ DEATH IN RIVER
                                                                                         107

125
                            THE CAMERA EYE (ii)


       the Pennypackers went to the Presbyterian church

4nd the Pennypacker girls sang chilly shrill soprano in

the choir and everybody was greeted when they went into

church and outside the summer leaves on the trees wig-

wagged greenblueyellow through the windows and we all

filed into the pew and Pd asked Mr. Pennypacker he was

a deacon in the church who were the Molly Maguires?

        a squirrel was scolding in the whiteoak but the Penny-

packer girls all the young ladies in their best hats singing

the anthem who were the Molly Maguires? thoughts,

bulletholes in an old barn abandoned mine pits black

skeleton tipples weedgrown dumps who were the Molly

Maguires? but it was too late you couldn’t talk in church

and all the young ladies best hats and pretty pink green

 blue yellow dresses and the squirrel scolding who were

 the Molly Maguires?

         and before I knew it it was communion and I wanted

 to say I hadn’t been baptized but all eyes looked shut up

 when I started to whisper to Con

         communion was grape juice in little glasses and

 little squares of stale bread and you had to gulp the bread

 and put your handkerchief over your mouth and look

 holy and the little glasses made a funny sucking noise and

 kll the quiet chtirch in the middle of the sunny brightblue

          io8

126
Sunday in the middle of whiteoaks wigwagging and the

smell of fries from the white house and the blue quiet

Sunday smoke of chimneys from stoves where fried

chicken sizzled and fritters and brown gravy set back to

keep hot

        in the middle of squirrels and minetipples in the

middle of the bine Pennsylvania summer Sunday the

little glasses sucking to get the last drop of communion

        and I felt itchy in the back of my neck would I be

struck by lightning eating the bread drinking the com-

munion me not believing or baptized or Presbyterian and

who were the Molly Maguires? masked men riding at

night shooting bullets into barns at night what were they

after in the oldtime night?

        church was over and everybody was filing out and

being greeted as they went out and everybody had a good

appetite after communion but I couldn^t eat much itchy

in the back of the neck scary with masked men riding

Molly Maguires


                                                      NEWSREEL IX


               FORFEIT STARS BY DRINKING

         *^Oh bury me not
                                        on the lone frairie*^

            They heeded not his dying frayer
            They buried him there on the lone frairie

                                                                               109

127
               COLLEGE HEAD DENIES KISSES

       then our courage returned for we knew that rescue was
near at hand, we shouted and yelled again but did not know
whether we were heard. Then came the unsealing and I lost
consciousness. All the days and nights fell back and I dropped
into a sleep

     VOTE AT MIDNIGHT ON ALTMAN’S FATE

This is the fourth day we have been down here. That is
what I think but our watches staffed, I have been waiting
in the dark because we have been eating the wax from our
safety lamfs, I have also eaten a flug of tobaccoy some bark
and some of my shoe, I could only chew it, I hofe you
can read this. I am not afraid to die, O holy Virgin have
mercy on me, I think my time has come. You know what
my froferty is. We worked for it together and it is all yours.
This is my will and you must keef it. You have been a good
wife. May the holy virgin guard you, 1 hofe this reaches
you sometime and you can read it. It has been very quiet
down here and I wonder what has become of our comrades,
Goodby until heaven shall bring us together.

                       Girls Annoyer Lashed in Public

                           COVETS OSTRICHES

              In a little box just six by three
              And his bones now rot on the lone frairie



                                                                                  MAC


    Mac went down to the watertank beyond the yards to
wait for a chance to hop a freight. The old man’s hat and
his ruptured shoes were ashen gray with dustj he was sit-
ting all hunched up with his head between his knees and
didn’t make a move until Mac was right up to him. Mac
         no

128
sat down beside him. A rank smell of feverish sweat cam^.-
from the old man. ^What^s the trouble, daddy?
    ^^I^m through, that’s all ... I been a lunger all m)
life an’ I guess it’s got me now.” His mouth twisted in
a spasm of pain. He let his head droop between his knees,
After a minute he raised his head again, making little
feeble gasps with his mouth like a dying fish. When he
got his breath he said, ^^It’s a razor a’ slicin’ off my lungs
every time. Stand by, will you, kid?” ^^Sure I will,” said
Mac.
    ^^Listen, kid, I wanna go West to where there’s trees
an’ stuff ... You got to help me into one o’ them cars.
I’m too weak for the rods . .        . Don’t let me lay down

 .  . I’ll start Weedin’ if I lay down, see.” He choked
again.

    ^^I got a coupla bucks. I’ll square it with the brakemari
maybe.”
    ^^You don’t talk like no vag.”
    ^^I’m a printer. I wanta make San Francisco soon as 1
can.”
                                  I’ll be a son of a bitch. Listen here,
    ^^A workin’ man 5
kid ... I ain’t worked in seventeen years.”
    The train came in and the engine stood hissing by the
watertank.
    Mac helped the old man to his feet and got him
propped in the corner of a flatcar that was loaded with
machine parts covered with a tarpaulin. He saw the fire-
man and the engineer looking at them out of the cab, but
they didn’t say anything.
    When the train started the wind was cold. Mac tool'

off his coat and put it behind the old man’s head to keep

it from jiggling with the rattling of the car. The old man
sat with his eyes closed and his head thrown back. Mac
didn’t know whether he was dead or not. It got to be
night. Mac was terribly cold and huddled shivering in a
fold of tarpaulin in the other end of the car.

                                                                               Ill

129
   In the gray of dawn Mac woke up from a doze with
his teeth chattering. The train had stopped on a siding.
His legs were so numb it was some time before he could
stand on them. He went to look at the old man, but he
couldn’t tell whether he was dead or not. It got a little
lighter and the east began to glow like the edge of a piece
of iron in a forge. Mac jumped to the ground and walked
back along the tram to the caboose.
    The brakeman was drowsing beside his lantern. Mac
told him that an old tramp was dying in one of the flat-
cars. The brakeman had a small flask of whisky in his
good coat that hung on a nail in the caboose. They walked
together up the track again. When they got to the flatcar

it was almost day. The old man had flopped over on his
side. His face looked white and grave like the face of a
statue of a Civil War general. Mac opened his coat and
the filthy torn shirts and underclothes and put his hand on
the old man’s chest. It was cold and lifeless as a board.
When he took his hand away there was sticky blood on it.
    “Hemorrhage,” said the brakeman, making a perfunc-
tory clucking noise in his mouth.
    The brakeman said they’d have to get the body off the
train. They laid him down flat in the ditch beside the bal-
last with his hat over his face. Mac asked the brakeman
if he had a spade so that they could bury him, so that the
 buzzards wouldn’t get him, but he said no, the gandy-
walkers would find him and bury him. He took Mac back
 to the caboose and gave him a drink and asked him all
 about how the old man had died.
     Mac beat his way to San Francisco.
     Maisie was cold and bitter at first, but after they’d
 talked a little while she said he looked thin and ragged as
 a bum and burst into tears and kissed him. They went to
 get her savings out of the bank and bought Mac a suit and
 went down to City Hall and got married without saying
 anything to her folks. They were both very happy going
          II2

130
down on the train to San Diego, and they got a furnished
room there with kitchen privileges and told the landlady
they’d been married a year. They wired Maisie’s folks
that they were down there on their honeymoon and would
be back soon.
    Mac got work there at a job printer’s and they started
payments on a bungalow at Pacific Beach. The work wasn’t
bad and he was pretty happy in his quiet life with Maisie,
After all, he’d had enough bumming for a while. When
Maisie went to the hospital to have the baby, Mac had to
beg a two months’ advance of pay from Ed Balderston^
his boss. Even at that they had to take out a second mort-»
gage on the bungalow to pay the doctor’s bill. The baby
was a girl and had blue eyes and they named her Rose.
    Life in San Diego was sunny and quiet. Mac went to
work mornings on the steamcar and came back evenings
on the steamcar and Sundays he puttered round the house
or sometimes sat on one of the beaches with Maisie and
the kid. It was understood between them now that he had
to do everything that Maise wanted because he’d given
her such a tough time before they were married. The next
year they had another kid and Maisie was sick and in hos-
pital a long time after, so that now all that he could do
with his pay each week was cover the interest on his debts,
and he was always having to kid the grocerystore along
and the milkman and the bakery to keep their charge-
accounts going from week to week. Maisie read a lot of
magazines and always wanted new things for the house, a
pianola, or a new icebox, or a fireless cooker. Her brothers
were making good money in the real estate business in L<^
Angeles and her folks were coming up in the world.
Whenever she got a letter from them she’d worry Mac
about striking his boss for more pay or moving to a better

job.
    When there was anybody of the wobbly crowd in town
down on his uppers or when they were raising money for

                                                                                1 13

131
utrike funds ot* anything like that he’d help them out with
a couple of dollars, but he never could do much for fear
Maisie would find out about it. Whenever she found The
Affeal to Reeson or any other radical paper round the
house she’d burn it up, and then they’d quarrel and be
sulky and make each other’s lives miserable for a few
days, until Mac decided what was the use, and never spoke
to her about it. But it kept them apart almost as if she
thought he was going out with some other woman.
    One Saturday afternoon Mac and Maisie had managed
to get a neighbor to take care of the kids and were going
into a vaudeville theater when they noticed a crowd at

the corner in front of Marshall’s drugstore. Mac elbowed

his way through. A thin young man in blue denim was
standing close to the corner lamppost where the firealarm
was, reading the Declaration of Independence: When in

 the course of human events ... A cop came up and told
him to move on .  . maUenahle right         . . . Uje^ liberty
and the pursuit of hafpness.
     Now there were two cops. One of them had the young
 man by the shoulders and was trying to pull him loose
 from the lamppost.
     ^^Come on, Fainy, we’ll be late for the show,” Maisie
 kept saying.
     ^^Hey, get a filej the bastard’s locked himself to the

 post,” he heard one cop say to the other. By that time
 Maisie had managed to hustle him to the theater box-

 office. After all, he’d promised to take her to the show
 and she hadn’t been out all winter. The last thing he saw
 the cop had hauled off and hit the young guy in the

 corner of the jaw.
     Mac sat there in the dark stuffy theater all afternoon.
 He didn’t see the acts or the pictures between the acts.
  He didn’t speak to Maisie. He sat there feeling sick in

 the pit of his stomach. The boys must be staging a free-

  speech fight right here in town. Now and then he glanced

           114

132
at Maisie’s face in. the dim glow from the stage. It had
puffed out a little in wellsatisfied curves like a cat sitting
by a warm stove, but she was still a good looker. SheM
already forgotten everything and was completely happy
looking at the show, her lips parted, her eyes bright, like
a little girl at a party. “I guess IVe sold out to the
sonsobitches allright, allnght,” he kept saying to him-
self.
   The last number on the programme was Eva Tanguay.
The nasal voice singing Pm Eva Tanguay^ I don^t care
brought Mac out of his sullen trance. Everything sud-
denly looked bright and clear to him, the proscenium with
its heavy gold fluting, the people’s faces in the boxes, the
heads in front of him, the tawdry powdery mingling of
amber and blue lights on the stage, the scrawny woman
flinging herself around inside the rainbow hoop of the
spotlight.

                 The fafers say that Pm insane
                 But                        don^t . .   . ccwe.

    Mac got up. ^^Maisie, I’ll meet you at the house. You
see the rest of the show. I feel kind of bum.” Before she
could answer, he’d slipped out past the other people m
the row, down the aisle and out. On the street there war
nothing but the ordinary Saturday afternoon crowd. Mac
walked round and round the downtown district. He didn’t
even know where LW.W. headquarters was. He had to
talk to somebody. As he passed the Hotel Brewster he
caught a whiff of beer. What he needed was a drink. Thir
way he was going nuts.
    At the next corner he went into a saloon and drank foui
rye whiskies straight. The bar was lined with men drink^
ing, treating each other, talking loud about baseball, prize-

fights, Eva Tanguay and her Salome dance.
    Beside Mac was a big redfaced man with a wide-
brimmed felt hat on the back of his head. When Mac

                                                                               115

133
reached for his fifth drink this man put his hand on his
arm and said, “Pard, have that on me if you don’t mind
                                                                   here’s lookin’ at
. . . I’m celebratin’ today.” “Thanks j
you,” sa,id Mac. “Pard, if you don’t mind my sayin’ so,
you’re drinkin’ like you wanted to drink the whole barrel
up at once and not leave any for the rest of us . .      , Have
a chaser.” “All right, bo,” said Mac. “Make it a beer
chaser.”
    “My name’s McCreary,” said the big man. “I just sold
my fruit crop. Pm from up San Jacinto way.”
    “So’s my name McCreary, too,” said Mac.
    They shook hands heartily.
    “By the living jumbo, that’s a coincidence . . . We
must be kin or pretty, near it . . . Where you from,
pard?”
    “Pm from Chicago, but my folks was Irish.”
    “Mine was from the East, Delaware . . . but it’s the
good old Scotch-Irish stock.”
    They had more drinks on that. Then they went to
 another saloon where they sat in a corner at a table and
 talked. The big man talked about his ranch and his apricot
 crop and how his wife was bedridden since his last child
 had come. “I’m awful fond of the old gal, but what can
 a feller do? Can’t get gelded just to be true to your
 mfe.” “I like my wife swell,” said Mac, “and I’ve got
 swell kids. Rose is four and she’s beginning to read already
 and Ed’s about learnin’ to walk.      . . . But hell, before I
 was married I used to think I might amount to somethin’
 in the world ... I don’t mean I thought I was anythin’
 in particidar ... You know how it is.” “Sure, pard, I
 used to feel that way when I was a young feller.”
 “Maisie’s a fine girl, too, and I like her better all the
 time,” said Mac, feeling a warm tearing wave of affection
 go over him, like sometimes a Saturday evening when
 he’d helped her bathe the kids and put them to bed and
 *he room was still steamy from their baths and his eyes

          ii6

134
                                                                          y





suddenly met Maisie’s eyes and there was nowhere they
had to go and they were just both of them there together.
   The man from up San Jacinto way began to sing:

                 0 my wife has gone to the country
                 Hoorayy hooray.
                 1 love my wifCy but oh you kiiy
                 My wife^s gone away.

    ^^But God damn it to hell/’ said Mac, ^^a rnan^s got to
work for more than himself and his kids to feel right.^^
         agree with you absholootely, pardj every man for
himself, and the devil take the hindmost.” “Oh, hell,”
said Mac, “I wish I was on the bum again or up at Gold-
field with the bunch.”
    They drank and drank and ate free lunch and di’ank
some more, all the time rye with beer chasers, and the
man from up San Jacinto way had a telephone number
and called up some girls and they bought a bottle of
whisky and went out to their apartment, and the rancher
from up San Jacinto way sat with a girl on each knee ^ing-
ing My wife has gone to the country. Mac just sat belch-
                                                                                      then
ing in a corner with his head dangling over his chest j
suddenly he felt bitterly angry and got to his feet upset-
ting a table with a glass vase on it.
    “McCreary,” he said, “this is no place for a class-
conscious rebel , . . I’m a wobbly, damn you . ,  Pm
goln’ out and get in this free-speech fight.”
    The other McCreary went on singing and paid no atten-

tion. Mac went out and slammed the door. One of the
girls followed him out jabbering about the broken vase^
but he pushed her in the face and went out into the quiet

street. It was moonlight. He^d lost the last steamcar and
would have to walk home.
    When he got to the house he found Malsie sitting on
the porch in her kimono. She was crying. “And I had such
a nice supper for you,” she kept saying, and her eyes

                                                                                iry

135
                                                                                              ,



looked into him cold and bitter the way they’d been when
he’d gotten back from Goldfield before they were mar-
ried.
   The next day he had a hammering headache and his
stomach was upset. He figured up he’d spent fifteen dol-
lars that he couldn’t afford to waste. Maisie wouldn’t
speak to him. He stayed on in bed, rolling round, feeling
miserable, wishing he could go to sleep and stay asleep
forever. That Sunday evening Maisie’s brother Bill came
to supper. As soon as he got into the house Maisie started
talking to Mac as if nothing had happened. It made him
sore to feel that this was just in order to keep Bill from
knowing they had quarrelled.
    Bill was a powerfullybuiit towhaired man with a red
neck, just beginning to go to fat. He sat at the table, eat-
ing the potroast and cornbread Maisie had made, talking
big about the real estate boom up in Los Angeles. He’d
been a locomotive engineer and had been hurt in a wreck
and had had the lucky breaks with a couple of options on
lots ,he’d bought with his compensation money. He tried

 to argue Mac into giving up his job in San Diego and
 Eoming in with him. ^^I’ll get you in on the ground flooi
just for Maisie’s sake,” he said over and over again. ^^And
 in ten years you’ll be a rich man, like I’m goin’ to be in

 less time than that . . . Now’s the time, Maisie, for you
 folks to make a break, while you’re young, or it’ll be too
 late and Mac’ll just be a workingman all his life.”
     Maisie^s eyes shone. She brought out a chocolate layer
 take and a bottle of sweet wine. Her cheeks flushed and
 she kept laughing showing all her little pearly teeth. She
 hadn’t looked so pretty since she’d had her first baby.
 Bill’s talk about money made her drunk.
     “Suppose a feller didn’t want to get rich . . . you
 iinow what Gene Debs said, T want to rise with the
 tanks, not from the ranks,’ ” said Mac.
      Maisie and Bill laughed. “When a guy talks like that

          ii8

136
he’s ripe for the nuthouse, take it from me,” said Bifr
Mac flushed and said nothing.
    Bill pushed back his chair and cleared his throat in a
serious tone: ^^Look here, Mac . . . Pm goin’ to be
around this town for a few days lookin’ over the situa-
tion, but looks to me like things was pretty dead. Now
what I propose is this ... You know what I think of
Maisie ... I think she’s about the sweetest little girl in
the world. I wish my wife had half what Maisie’s got . .       .
Well, anyway, here’s my proposition* Out on Ocean View
Avenue I’ve got several magnificent missionstyle bunga^
lows I haven’t disposed of yet, twentyfivefoot frontage on
a refined residential street by a hundredfoot depth. Why^
I’ve gotten as high as five grand in cold cash for ’em. In
a year of two none of us fellers’ll be able to stick our
noses in there. It’ll be millionaires’ row .            .  . Now if
you’re willing to have the house in Maisie’s name I’ll tell
you what I’ll do .     . . I’ll swop properties with you, pay-
ing all the expenses of searching title and transfer and
balance up the mortgages, that I’ll hold so’s to keep ’em
in the family, so that you won’t have to make substantially
bigger payments than you do here, and will be launched
on the road to success.”
    ^^Oh, Bill, you darling cried Maisie. She ran over and
kissed him on the top of the head and sat swinging her
legs on the arm of his chair. ^^Gee, I’ll have to sleep on
that,” said Macj ^flt’s mighty white of you to make the
offer.” ^^Fainie, I’d think you’d be more grateful to Bill,”
snapped Maisie. ^^Of course we’ll do it.”

    ^^No, you’re quite right,” said Bill.              man’s got to
think a proposition like that over. But don’t forget the
advantages offered, better schools for the kids, more re-
fined surroundings, an upandcoming boom town instead
of a dead one, chance to get ahead in the world instead

of being a goddam wageslave.”
    So a month later the McCrearys moved up to Los An-

                                                                               119

137
geles. The expenses of moving and getting the furniture
Installed put Mac five hundred dollars in debt. On top of
that little Rose caught the measles and the doctor’s bill
started mounting. Mac couldn’t get a job on any of the
papers. Up at the union local that he transferred to they
had ten men out of work as it was.
    He spent a lot of time walking about town worrying.
He didn’t like to be at home any more. He and Maisie
never got on now. Maisie was always thinking about what
went on at brother Bill’s house, what kind of clothes
Mary Virginia, his wife, wore, how they brought up their
thildren, the fine new victrola they’d bought. Mac sat on
benches in parks round town, reading The Affeal to
Reason and The Industrial Worker and the local papers.
    One day he noticed The Industrial Worker sticking out
of the pocket of the man beside him. They had both sat
on the bench a long time when something made him turn
to look at the man. ^^Say, aren’t you Ben Evans?” ^Well,
Mac, I’ll be goddamned . . . What’s the matter, boy,
you’re lookin’ thin?” ^^Aw, nothin’, I’m lookin’ for a
master, that’s all.”
    They talked for a long time. Then they went to have
a cup of coffee in a Mexican restaurant where some of the
boys hung out. A young blonde fellow with blue eyes
joined them there who talked English with an accent.
Mac was surprised to find out that he was a Mexican.
Everybody talked Mexico. Madero had started his revo-
lution. The fall of Diaz was expected any day. All over
the peons were taking to the hills, driving the rich cien-

tificos off their ranches. Anarchist propaganda was spread-
ing among the town workers. The restaurant had a warm
smell of chiles and overroasted coffee. On each table there
 were niggerpink and vermilion paper flowers, an occa-
rional flash of white teeth in bronze and brown faces talk-
ing low. Some of the Mexicans there belonged to the
 l.W.W,, but most of them were anarchists. The talk of

138
          y




revolution and foreign places made him feel happy and
adventurous again, as if he had a purpose in life, like
when heM been on the bum with Ike Hall.
    ^^Say, Mac, let^s go to Mexico and see if there’s any-
thing in this revoloossione talk,” Ben kept saying.
    ^^If it wasn’t for the kids .        . . Hell, Fred Hoff wai'
right when he bawled me out and said a revolutionist
oughtn’t to marry.”
    Eventually Mac got a job as linotype operator on The
Times and things at the house were a little better, but he
never had any spare money, as everything had to go into
paying debts and interest on mortgages. It was night work
again, and he hardly ever saw Maisie and the kids any
more. Sundays Maisie would take little Ed to brother
Bill’s and he and Rose would go for walks or take trolley-
trips. That was the best part of the week. Saturday nights
he’d sometimes get to a lecture or go down to chat with
the boys at the LW.W. local, but he was scared to be seen
round in radical company too much for fear of losing his
job. The boys thought he was pretty yellow but put up
with him because they thought of him as an old timer.
    He got occasional letters from Milly telling him about
Uncle Tim’s health. She had married a man named Cohen
who was a registered accountant and worked in one of the

offices at the stockyards. Uncle Tim lived with them. Mac
would have liked to bring him down to live with him in
Los Angeles, but he knew that it would only mean squaL
bling with Maisie. Milly’s letters were pretty depressing,-
She felt funny, she said, to be married to a Jew. Uncle
Tim was always poorly. The doctor said it was the drink,
but whenever they gave him any money he drank it right

up. She wished she could have children. Fainie was lucky,
she thought, to have such nice children. She was afraid

that poor Uncle Tim wasn’t long for this world.
    The same day that the papers carried the murder of
Madero in Mexico Cityff^argot a wire from Milly that

                                                                               I2I

139
Uncle Tim was dead and please to wire money for the
funeral. Mac went to the savingsbank and drew out $53.75
he had in an account for the children’s schooling and took

it down to the Western Union and wired fifty to her.
Maisie didn’t find out until the baby’s birthday came
roundj when she went down to deposit five dollars birth-
day money from brother Bill.
    That night when Mac let himself in by the latchkey he
was surprised to find the light on in the hall. Maisie was
sitting half asleep on the hall settee with a blanket
wrapped round her waiting for him. He was pleased to
see her and went up to kiss her. ^What’s the matter,
baby?” he said. She pushed him away from her and
jumped to her feet.
    ^^You thief,” she said. “I couldn’t sleep till I told you
what I thought of you. I suppose you’ve been spending

it on drink or on some other woman. That’s why I never
Bee you any more.”
    ^^Maisie, calm down, old girl . .      . What’s the mattery

let’s talk about it quietly.”
    ^T’ll get a divorce, that’s what I’ll do. Stealing money
from your own children to make yourself a bum with      . . .
your own poor little . .
    Mac drew himself up and clenched his fists. He spoke
very quietly, although his lips were trembling.
    ^^Maisie, I had an absolute right to take out that money.
Fll deposit some more in a week or two, and it’s none
of your damn business.”
                                                                              you aren’t
           fat chance you saving up fifty dollars 5
man enough to make a decent living for your wife and
children so you have to take it out of your poor little inno-
cent children’s bank account,” Maisie broke out into dry
sobbing.
     ^^Maisie, that’s enough of that , . . I’m about through.”
     “I’m the one that’s through with you and your ungodly
 socialistic talk. That never got nobody anywheres, and the

          122

140
iowdown bums you go around with ... I wish to Got,
Pd never married you. I never would have, you can he
damn well sure of that if I hadn^t got caught the wav I
did.”
    “Maisie, don’t talk like that.”
    Maisie walked straight up to him, her eyes wide and
feverish.
    ^^This house is in my name; don’t forget that.”
    ^^All right, I’m through.”
    Before he knew it he had slammed the door behind him
and was walking down the block. It began to rain. Each
raindrop made a splatter the size of a silver dollar in th*
dust of the street. It looked like stage rain round the
arclight. Mac couldn’t think where to go. Drenched, he
walked and walked. At one corner there was a clump of
palms in a yard that gave a certain amount of shelter, lie
stood there a long time shivering. He was almost crying
thinking of the warm gentleness of Maisie when he used
to pull the cover a little way back and slip into bed beside
her asleep when he got home from work in the clanking
sour printing plant, her breasts, the feel of the nipples
through the thin nightgown; the kids in their cots out on
the sleepingporch, him leaning over to kiss each of the
little warm foreheads. ^^Well, I’m through,” he said
aloud as if he were speaking to somebody else. T/iea only
did the thought come to him, ^^I’m free to see tJie coimtry
now, to work for the movement, to go on the hdm again.”
    Finally he went to Ben Evans’ boarding house. It was
a long time before he could get anybody to come to the
door. When he finally got in Ben sat up in bed and looked
at him stupid with sleep. ^What the hell?” ‘^Say, Ben,
I’ve just broken up housekeepin’ . . . I’m goin’ to Mex-
ico.” ^^Are the cops after you? For crissake, this wasn’t any
place to come.” ^^No, it’s just my wife.” Ben laughed.
^^Oh, for the love of Mike^” ^‘Say, Ben, do you want to
come to Mexico and see the revolution?” ^‘What the hei!

                                                                               123

141
could you do in Mexico?     . . . Anyway, the boys elected
me secretary of local 257 ... I got to stay here an^ earn
                                                                  take your clothes
my seventeenfifty. Say, you^re soaked j
off and put on my workclothes hangin^ on the back of the
door ... You better get some sleep. Pll move over.”
    Mac stayed in town two weeks until they could get a
man to take his place at the linotype. He wrote Maisie
that he was going away and that he’d send her money to
help support the kids as soon as he was in a position to.
Then one morning he got on the tram with twentyfive
dollars in his pocket and a ticket to Yuma, Arizona. Yuma
turned out to be hotter’n the hinges of hell. A guy at the
railroad men’s boarding house told him he’d sure die of
thirst if he tried going into Mexico there, and nobody
knew anything about the revolution, anyway. So he beat
his way along the Southern Pacific to El Paso. Hell had
broken loose across the border, everybody said. The ban-
dits were likely to take Juarez at any moment. They shot
Americans on sight. The bars of El Paso were full of
ranchers and mining men bemoaning the good old days
when Porfino Diaz was in power and a white man could
make money in Mexico. So it was with beating heart that
Mac walked across the international bridge into the dusty-
bustling adobe streets of Juarez.
    Mac walked around looking at the small trolleycars and
the mules and the walls daubed with seablue and the peon
women squatting behind piles of fruit in the marketplace
and the crumbling scrollface churches and the deep bars
open to the street. Everything was strange and the air was
peppery to his nostrils and he was wondering what he was
going to do next. It was late afternoon of an April day.
Mac was sweating in his blue flannel shirt. His body felt

gritty and itchy and he wanted a bath. ^^Gettin’ too old
for this kinda stuff,” he told himself. At last he found the
house of a man named Ricardo Perez whom one of the
Mexican anarchists in Los Angeles had told him to look

         124

142
up. He had trouble finding him in the big house with an
untidy courtyard, on the edge of town. None of the
women hanging out clothes seemed to understand Mac^s
lingo. At last Mac heard a voice from above in carefully
modulated English. ^^Come up if you are looking for
                                  please ... I am Ricardo Perez.’*
Ricardo Perez . . .
Mac looked up and saw a tall bronzecolored grayhaired
man in an old tan duster leaning from the top gallery of
the courtyard. He went up the iron steps. The tall man
shook hands with him.
    ^Tellowworker McCreary      . . . My comrades wrote
me you were coming,” ^^That’s me, allright . . . Pm
glad you talk English.” “I lived in Santa Fe many years
                                                                                    please
and in Brockton, Massachusetts. Sit down .         .  .
... I am very happy to welcome an American revolu-
tionary worker .     . . Though our ideas probably do not
entirely agree we have much in common. We are com--
rades in the big battle.” He patted Mac on the shoulder
and pressed him into a chair. “Please.” There were sev-
eral little yellow children in torn shirts running round
barefoot. Ricardo Perez sat down and took the smallest
on his knee, a little girl with kinky pigtails and a smudged
face. The place smelt of chile and scorched olive oil and
children and washing. “What are you going to do in
Mexico, fellowworker?”
    Mac blushed. “Oh, I want to kinda get into things, into
the revolution.”
    “The situation is very confusing here . . . Our town-
workers are organizing and are classconscious but the
peons, the peasants, are easily misled by unscrupulous
leaders.”
    “I want to see some action, Perez ... I was living in
Los Angeles an’ gettin’ to be a goddam booster like the
rest of ’em. I can earn my keep in the printin’ line, I
guess.”

143
    “I must introduce vou to the comrades . .              . Please

 » . . We will go now.”
    Blue dusk was swooping down on the streets when they
went out. Lights were coming out yellow. Mechanical
pianos jinglejangled in bars. In a gateway a little outof-
tune orchestra was playing. The market was all lit up by
 flareSj all kinds of shiny bnghtcolored stuff was for sale
at booths. At a corner an old Indian and an old broad-
 faced woman, both of them blind and heavily pockmarked,
were singing a shrill endless song in the middle of a dense
 group of short thickset country people, the women with
 black shawls over their heads, the men in white cotton
 suits like pajamas.
     ‘^They sing about the murder of Madero ... It is
 very good for the education of the people ... You see
 they cannot read the papers so they get their news in
 songs ... It was your ambassador murdered Madero.
 He was a bourgeois idealist but a great man     . .   . Please

 .  .  . Here is the hall. ... You see that sign says ^Wiva
 the Revindicating Revolution prelude to the Social Revo-
 lution.” This is the hall of the Anarchist Union of In-
 dustry and Agriculture. Huerta has a few federales here
 but they are so weak they dare not attack us. Ciudad
 Juarez is heart and soul with the revolution       . .   . Please

 . .   . you will greet the comrades with a few words.”
     The smoky hall and the platform were filled with
 swarthy men in blue denim workclothesj in the back were
 a few peons in white. Many hands shook Mac’s, black
 eyes looked sharp into his, several men hugged him. He
  vas given a campchair m the front row on the platform.
 Evidently Ricardo Perez was chairman. Applause fol-
 lowed in every pause in his speech. A feeling of big events
 hovered in the hail. When Mac got on his feet, somebody

'”'^^elled ^^Solidarity forever” in English. Mac stammered a
 few words about how he wasn’t an official representative
 of the I.W.W. but that all the same classconscious Ameri-

          126

144
can workers were watching the Mexican revolution with
big hopes, and ended up with the wobbly catchword about
building the new society in the shell of the old. The
speech went big when Perez translated it and Mac felt
pretty good. Then the meeting went on and on, more and
more speeches and occasional songs. Mac found himself
nodding several times. The sound of the strange language
made him sleepy. He barely managed to keep awake until
a small band in the open door of the hall broke into a tune
and everybody sang and the meeting broke up.
    ^^ThaPs Cuatro Milfas . ,       . that means four corn-
fields . .    . that’s a song of the peons everybody’s singing
now,” said Perez.
    “I’m pretty hungry ... I’d like to get a little some-
thing to eat somewheres,” said Mac. “I haven’t eaten since
morning when I had a cup of coffee and a doughnut in
El Paso.”
    “We will eat at the house of our comrade,” said Perez.
“Please . .    . this way.”
    They went in off the street, now black and empty,
through a tall door hung with a bead curtain, into a white-
washed room brightly lit by an acetylene flare that smelt
strong of carbide. They sat down at the end of a long
table with a spotted cloth on it. The table gradually filled
with people from the meeting, mostly young men in blue
workclothes, with thin sharp faces. At the other end sat
an old dark man with the big nose and broad flat cheek-
bones of an Indian. Perez poured Mac out two glasses of
a funnytasting white drink that made his head spin. The
 food was very hot with pepper and chile and he choked
 on it a little bit. The Mexicans petted Mac like a child

at his birthday party. He had to drink many glasses of
beer and cognac. Perez went home early and left him in
 charge of a young fellow named Pablo. Pablo had a Colt
 automatic on a shoulder strap that he was very proud of.

                                                                                227

145
He spoke a little pidginenglish and sat with one hand
round Mac’s neck and the other on the buckle of his
holster. ^^Gringo bad   . . . Kill him quick . . , Fellow-
worker good .     , . mternacional .     , . hurray/’ he kept
saying. They sang the International several times and
then the Marseillaise and the Carmagnole, Mac was car-
ried along in a peppery haze. He sang and drank and ate
and everything began to lose outline.
    ^Tellowworker marry nice girl/’ said Pablo. They were
standing at a bar somewhere. He made a gesture of sleep-
ing with his two hands against his face. ^^Come.”
    They went to a dancehall. At the entrance everybody
had to leave his gun on a table guarded by a soldier in a
visored cap. Mac noticed that the men and girls drew
away from him a little. Pablo laughed. ^^They think you
gringo ... I tell them revolucionario mternacional.
There she^ nice girl      . .  . Not goddam whore . .         . not
pay, she nice working girl ,      . . comrade.”
    Mac found himself being introduced to a brown broad-
 faced girl named Encarnacion. She was neatly dressed
 and her hair was very shinyblack. She gave him a bright
 flash of a smile. He patted her on the cheek. They drank
 some beer at the bar and left. Pablo had a girl with him
 too. The others stayed on at the dancehall. Pablo and his
 girl walked round to Encarnacion’s house with them. It
 was a room in a little courtyard. Beyond it was a great
 expanse of lightcolored desert land stretching as far as you
 could see under a waning moon. In the distance were some
 tiny specks of fires. Pablo pointed at them with his full
 hand and whispered^ “Revolucion.”
     Then they said good night at the door of Encarnacion’s
 little room that had a bed, a picture of the Virgin and a
 new photograph of Madero stuck up by a pin. Encarna-
 cion closed the dooi^, bolted it and sat down on the bed
  looking up at Mac with a smile.

           128

146
                             THE CAMERA EYE (12)


        when everybody went away for a trip Jeanne took

us out to play every day in Farragut Square and told you

about how in the Jura in winter the wolves come dowi\

and howl through the streets of the villages

        and sometimes weM see President Roosevelt ride by

all alone on a bay horse and once we were very proud

because when we took off our hats we were very proud

because he smiled and showed his teeth like in the news-

paper and touched his hat and we were very proud and

he had an aide de camp

       but we had a cloth duck that we used to play with

on the steps until it began to get dark and the wolves

howled ran with little children’s blood dripping from

their snout through the streets of che villages only it was

summer and between dog and wolf we’d be put to bed

and Jeanne was a young French girl from the Jura where

the wolves howled ran through the streets and when

everybody had gone to bed she would take you into her

bed

       and it was a very long scary story and the worst ol

the wolves howled through the streets gloaming to freeze

little children’s blood was the Loup Garou howling in

the Jura and we were scared and she had breasts under

her nightgown and the Loup Garou was terrible scary

                                                                               1 29

147
and black hair and rub against her and outside the wolves

howled in the streets and it was wet there and she said it

v^as nothing she had just washed herself

        but the Loup Garou was really a man hold me close

cheri a man howled through streets with a bloody snout

that tore up the bellies of girls and little children Loup

Garou

        and afterwards you knew what girls were made like

and she was very silly and made you promise not to tell

but you wouldn^t have anyway



                                                         NEWSREEL X


                    MOON’S PATENT IS FIZZLE

        insurgents win at Kansas polls Oak Park soulmates part
8000 to take autoride says girl begged for her husband

         PIT SENTIMENT FAVORS UPTURN
                    Oh you be-eautijul doll
                    You great btg beautljul doll

        the world cannot understand all that is involved m this,

 \lie said. It appears like an ordinary worldly affair with the
 trappings of what js low and vulgar but there is nothing of
 the sort. He is honest and sincere. I know him. I have
 fought side by side with him. My heart is with him now.

                    Let me throw my arms around you
                    Honey airdt I glad I jound you

         Almost Motionless In Midsummer Languor On Business
 Seas One Million See Drunkards Bounced
          130

148
        JURORS AT GATES OF BEEF BARONS

         compare love with Vesuvius emblazoned streets await
tramp of paladins

                      Honey ainh I glad I jound you
                      Oh you heautijul doll
                      You great hig heautijul doll

               TRADES WHITE HORSE FOR RED

         Madero’s troops defeat rebels in Battle at Parral Roose*
velt carries Illinois oratory closes eyelids' Chicago pleads fof
more water

    CONFESSED ANARCHISTS ON BENDED KNEES KISS U. S. FLAG
        The Sunbeam Movement is Spreading

        BOMB NO. 4 IN LEVEE WAR SPLINTERS
                              WEST SIDE SALOON

        a refort frinted Wednesday that a fatient in a frivate
favilion m St. Luke^s Hosfttal undergoing an oferatton for
the extlrfation of a cancerous growth at the base of the tongue
was General Grant was denied by both the hospital authorities
and Lieut. Howze who characterised the story as a deliberate
fabrication


                               THE CAMERA EYE (13)


         he was a towboat captain and he knew the river

blindfold from Indian Head to the Virginia Capes and

the bay and the Eastan Shoa up to Baltima’ for that

matter and he lived in a redbnck house in Alexandria

the pilothouse smelt of a hundred burntout pipes

        that’s the Mayflower the president’s yacht and that*

there’s the Dolphin and that’s the ole monitor Tippe*

149
i^moe and that there’s the revenoo cutter and we’re just

passin’ the podice boat

        when Cap’n Keen reaches up to pull the whistle on

the ceiling of the pilothouse you can see the red and

green bracelet tattooed under the black hairs on his wrist
        Ma soul an’ body ole Cap^n Gifford used ter be a

frien’ o’ mahne many’s the time we been oysterin’ together

on the Eastan Shba an’ oysterpirates used to shanghai

young fellers in those days an’ make ’em work all winter

you couldn’ git away less you swam ashoa and the water

was too damnation cole an’ the ole man used to take the

fellers’ clothes away so’s they couldn’t git ashoa when

they was anchored up in a crik or near a house or some-

thin’ boy they was mean customers the oysterpirates ma

soul and body onct there was a young feller they worked

till he dropped and then they’d just sling him overboard

 tongin’ for oysters or dredgin’ like them oysterpirates

did’s the meanest Idnda work in winter with the spray

 freezin’ on the lines an’ cuttin’ your hands to shreds an’

 the dredge foulin’ every minute an’ us havin’ to haul it

 up an’ fix it with our hands in the icy water hauled up a

 stiff onct        What’s a stiff? Ma soul an’ body a stiff’s a

 dead man ma boy a young feller it was too without a stitch

 on him an’ the body looked like it had been beat with a

 belayin’ pin somethin’ terrible or an’ oar mebbe reckon he

 wouldn’t work or was sick or somethin’ an’ the ole man

          132

150
jus’ beat him till he died sure couldn’t a been nothin’ but
an oysterpirate



                                                                           JANEY


    When Janey was little she lived in an old flatface brick
house a couple of doors up the hill from M Street in
Georgetown. The front part of the house was always
dark because Mommer kept the heavy lace curtains drawn
to and the yellow linen shades with lace inset bands down.
Sunday afternoons Janey and Joe and Ellen and Francie
had to sit in the front room and look at pictures or read
books. Janey and Joe read the funnypaper together be-*
cause they were the oldest and the other two were just
babies and not old enough to know what was funny any-
way. They couldn’t laugh outloud because Popper sat
with the rest of The Sunday Star on his lap and usually
went to sleep after dinner with the editorial section crum-
pled in one big blueveined hand. Tiny curds of sunlight
flickering through the lace insets in the window shade
would lie on his bald head and on one big red flange of
his nose and on the droop of one mustache and on his
speckled sundayvest and on the white starched shirt-
sleeves with shiny cuffs, held up above the elbow by a
rubber band. Janey and Joe would sit on the same chait
feeling each other’s ribs jiggle when they laughed about
the Katzenjammer kids setting off a cannoncracker under
the captain’s stool. The little ones would see them laugh-
ing and start laughing too, ^^Shut up, can’t you,” Jose
would hiss at them out of the comer of his mouth. ^^You
don’t know what weVe laughing at.” Once in a while,

if there was no sound from Mommer who was taking her
Sunday afternoon nap upstairs stretched out in the back

                                                                               X33

151
bedroom in a faded lilac sack with frills on it, after theyM
listened for a long time to the drawnout snort that ended
in a little hiss of Popper’s snores, Joe would slip off his
chair and Janey would follow him without breathing into
the front hall and out the front door. Once they’d closed

It very carefully so that the knocker wouldn’t bang, Joe
would give her a slap, yell ^^You’re it” and run off down
the hill towards M Street, and she’d have to run after
him, her heart pounding, her hands cold for fear he’d
run away and leave her.
   Winters the brick sidewalks were icy and there were
colored women out spreading cinders outside their doors
when the children went to school mornings. Joe never
would walk with the rest of them because they were girls,
he lagged behind or ran ahead. Janey wished she could
walk with him but she couldn’t leave her little sisters
who held tight onto her hands. One winter they got in
the habit of walking up the hill with a little yaller girl
who lived directly across the street and whose name was
Pearl. Afternoons Janey and Pearl walked home together.
Pearl usually had a couple of pennies to buy bullseyes
or candy bananas with at a little store on Wisconsin
Avenue, and she always gave Janey half so Janey was
very fond of her. One afternoon she asked Pearl to come
in and they played dolls together under the big rose of
sharon bush in the back yard. When Pearl had gone
Mommer’s voice called from the kitchen. Mommer had
her sleeves rolled up on her faded pale arms and a checked
apron on and was rolling piecrust for supper so that her
hands were covered with flour.
    “Janey, come here,” she said. Janey knew from the
cold quaver in her voice that something was wrong.
    “Yes, Mommer.” Janey stood in front of her mother
shaking her head about so that the two stiff sandy pig-

tails lashed from side to side. “Stand still, child, for
gricious sake . . . Jane, I want to talk to you about some-
         m

152
thing. That little colored girl you brought in this after-
noon .  .       Janey^s heart was dropping. She had a sicK
feeling and felt herself blushing, she hardly knew why
                                                        I like and respect the
^^Now, don’t misunderstand me 3
                          some of them are fine selfrespectmg peo-
colored people 3
ple in their place .     .  . But you mustn’t bring that little
colored girl in the house again. Treating colored people
kindly and with respect is one of the signs of good breed-
ing ... You mustn’t forget that your mother’s people
were wellborn every inch of them .      . . Georgetown was
very different in those days. We lived in a big house with
most lovely lawns .   .  . but you must never associate with
colored people on an equal basis. Living in this neighbor-
hood it’s all the more important to be careful about those
things . . . Neither the whites nor the blacks respect
those who do .     . . That’s all, Janey, you understand;
now run out and play, it’ll soon be time for your supper.”
Janey tried to speak but she couldn’t. She stood stiff in
the middle of the yard on the grating that covered the
drainpipe, staring at the back fence. “Niggerlover,” yelled
Joe in her ear. “Niggerlover ump-mya-mya . . . Nig-
gerlover niggerlover ump-mya-mya.” Janey began to cry,
    Joe was an untalkative sandyhaired boy who could pitch
a mean outcurve when he was still little. He learned to
swim and dive In Rock Creek and used to say he wanted
to be motorman on a streetcar when he grew up. For
several years his best friend was Alec McPherson whose
father was a locomotive engineer on the B. and O. After
that Joe wanted to be a locomotive engineer. Janey used
to tag around after the two boys whenever they’d let her,
to the carbarns at the head of Pennsylvania Avenue where
they made friends with some of the conductors and motor-
men who used to let them ride on the platform a couple
of blocks sometimes if there wasn’t any inspector around,
down along the canal or up Rock Creek where they caught

                                                                               135

153
tadpoles and fell in the water and splashed each other
with mud.
    Summer evenings when the twilight was long after
supper they played lions and tigers with other kids from
the neighborhood in the long grass of some empty lots
near Oak Hill Cemetery. There were long periods when
there was measles or scarlet fever around and Mommer
wouldn^t let them out. Then Alec would come down and
they’d play three-o-cat in the back yard. Those were the
times Janey liked best. Then the boys treated her as one
of them. Summer dusk would come down on them sultry
and full of lightningbugs. If Popper was feeling in a good
mood he’d send them up the hill to the drugstore on N
Street to buy icecream, there’d be young men in their
shirtsleeves and straw hats strolling with girls who wore
a stick of punk in their hair to keep off the mosquitoes,
a rankness and a smell of cheap perfume from the colored
families crowded on their doorsteps, laughing, talking
softly with an occasional flash of teeth, rolling of a white
eyeball. The dense sweaty night was scary, hummed,
rumbled with distant thunder, with junebugs, with the
clatter of traffic from M Street, the air of the street dense
                                                                but when she was
and breathless under the thick trees 3
with Alec and Joe she wasn’t scared, not even of drunks
or big shamblefooted coloredmen. When they got back
Popper would smoke a cigar and they’d sit out in the back
yard and the mosquitoes ’ud eat them up and Mommer
and Aunt Francine '^nd the kids ’ud eat the icecream and
Popper would just smoke a cigar and tell them stories of
when he’d been a towboat captain down on the Chesapeake
in his younger days and he’d saved the barkentine Nmcy
Q in distress on the Kettlebottoms in a sou’west gale.
Then it’d get time to go to bed and Alec ’ud be sent home
and Janey’d have to go to bed in the stuffy little back
room on the top floor with her two little sisters in their
cribs against the opposite wall. Maybe a thunderstorm

         136

154
would come up and she’d lie awake staring up at the ceil-
ing cold with fright, listening to her little sisters whimper
as they slept until she heard the reassuring sound of
Mommer scurrying about the house closing windows, the
slam of a door, the whine of wind and rattle of rain and
the thunder rolling terribly loud and near overhead like
a thousand beertrucks roaring over the bridge. Times like
that she thought of going down to Joe’s room and crawl-
ing into bed with him, but for some reason she was afraid
to, though sometimes she got as far as the landing. He’d
laugh at her and call her a softie.
    About once a week Joe would get spanked. Popper
would come home from the Patent Office where he
worked, angry and out of sorts, and the girls would be
                                                                                       but
scared of him and go about the house quiet as mice 3
Joe seemed to like to provoke him, he’d run whistling
through the back hall or clatter up and down stairs making
a tremendous racket with his stubtoed ironplated shoes.
Then Popper would start scolding him and Joe would
stand in front of him without saying a word glaring at
the floor with bitter blue eyes. Janey’s insides knotted up
and froze when Popper would start up the stairs to the
bathroom pushing Joe in front of him. She knew what
would happen. He’d take down the razorstrop from be-
hind the door and put the boy’s head and shoulders under
his arm and beat him. Joe would clench his teeth and flush
and not say a word and when Popper was tired of beating
him they’d look at each other and Joe would be sent up
to his room and Popper would come down stairs trembling

all over and pretend nothing had happened, and Janey
would slip out into the yard with her fists clenched whis-
pering to herself,          hate him ... I hate him ... I

hate him.”
    Once a drizzly Saturday night she stood against the

fence in the dark looking up at the lighted window. Sh#
could hear Popper’s voice and Joe’s in an argument. Sh^
                                                                               m

155
thought maybe she’d fall down dead at the first thwack

of the razorstrop. She couldn’t hear what they were say-

ing. Then suddenly it came, the leather sound of blows
and Joe stifling a gasp. She was eleven years old. Some-
thing broke loose. She rushed into the kitchen with her
hair all wet from the rain, ^^Mommer, he’s killing Joe.
Stop It.” Her mother turned up a withered helpless
drooping face from a pan she was scouring. ^^Oh, you can’t
do anything.” Janey ran upstairs and started beating on
the bathroom door. ^^Stop it, stop it,” her voice kept yell-

ing. She was scared but something stronger than she was
                                                         there was Joe looking
had hold of her. The door opened j
sheepish and Popper with his face all flushed and the
razorstrop in his hand.
    ^^Beat me . . . it’s me that’s bad ... I won’t have
you beating Joe like that.” She was scared. She didn’t
know what to do, tears stung m her eyes.
    Popper’s voice was unexpectedly kind*
    ^^You go straight up to bed without any supper and
remember that you have enough to do to fight your own
battles, Janey.” She ran up to her room and lay on the
bed shaking. When she’d gone to sleep Joe’s voice woke
her up with a start.
    He was standing in his nightgown in the door. ^‘Say,
Janey,” he whispered. ^^Don’t you do that again, see. I
can take care of myself, see. A girl can’t butt in between
men like that. When I get a job and make enough dough
Pll get me a gun and if Popper tries to beat me up I’ll
shoot him dead.” Janey began to sniffle. “What you
wanna cry forj this ain’t no Johnstown flood.”
    She could hear him tiptoe down the stairs again in his
bare feet.
    At highschool she took the commercial course and
learned stenography and typewriting. She was a plain
thinfaced sandyhaired girl, quiet and popular with the
teachers. Her fingers were quick and she picked up typing
         138

156
and shorthand easiI;^ She liked to read and used to get
bocks like The Insid^e of the Cufy The B (title of the
Strongy The Winnifig of Barbara Worth out of the li-
brary. Her mother kept telling her that she’d spoil her
eyes if she read so much. When she read she used to
imagine she was the heioinCj that the weak brother who
Went to the bad but was a gentleman at core and capable
of every sacrifice, like Sidney Carton in A Tale of Two
Cities was Joe and that the hero was Alec.
    She thought Alec was the bestlooking boy in George-
town and the strongest. He had black closecropped hsh
and a very v/hite ^km with a few freckles and a strong
squareshouldered way of walking. After him Joe was the
bestlookmg and strongest and the best baseball player
anyway. Everybody said he ought to go on through high-
school on account of being such a good baseball player,
but at the end of his first year Popper said he had three
girls to support and that Joe would have to get to workj
so he got a job as a Western Union messenger. Janey was
pretty proud of him in his uniform until the girls at high-
school kidded her about it. Alec’s folks had promised to
put him through college if he made good in highschool
so Alec worked hard. He wasn’t tough and dii tytalking
like most of the boys Joe knew. He was always nice to
Janey though he never seemed to want to be left alone
with her. She pretty well admitted to herself that she
had a terrible crush on Alec.
    The best day of her life was the sweltering summer
Sunday they all went canoeing up to Great Falls. She had
put up the lunch the night before. In the morning she
added a steak she found in the icebox. There was blue
haze at the end of every street of brick houses and dark
summergreen trees when before anybody else was awake
she and Joe crept out of the house round seven that morn
ing.
    They met Alec at the corner in front of the depot He

                                                                               139

157
stood waiting for them with his feet wide apart and a

fkillet in his hand.
    They all ran and caught the car that was just leaving

for Cabin John’s Bridge. They had the car all to theni-

selves like it was a private car. The car hummed over the

rails past whitewashed shanties and nigger cabins along
the canalj skirting hillsides where the sixfoot tall waving
corn marched in ranks like soldiers. The sunlight glanced

in bluewhite glare on the wavingdrooping leaves of the
                      glare, and a whirring and tinkling of grass-
tasslmg corn 5
hoppers and dryflies rose in hot smoke into the pale sky
round the clattering shaking electric car. They ate sweet
summerapples Joe had bought off a colored woman in
the station and chased each other round the car and flopped
down on top of each other in the cornerseats^ and they
laughed and giggled till they were weak. Then the car
                                                they could see the trestle-
was running through woods j
work of the rollercoasters of Glen Echo through the trees
and they piled off the car at Cabin John’s having more
fun than a barrel of monkeys.
    They ran down to the bridge to look up and down the
river brown and dark in the white glary morning between
foliagesodden banks; then they found the canoe that be-
longed to a friend of Alec’s in a house by the canal, bought
some cream soda and rootbeer and some packages of
 (leccos and started out. Alec and Joe paddled and Janey
sat in the bottom with her sweater rolled round a thwart
for a pillow. Alec was paddling in the bow. It was swelter-
ing hot. The sweat made the shirt cling to the hollow of
his chunky back that curved with every stroke of the
paddle. After a while the boys stripped to their bathing-
suits that they wore under their clothes. It made Janey’s
throat tremble to watch Alec’s back and the bulging
muscles of his arm as he paddled, made her feel happy
imd scared. She sat there in her white dimity dress, trail-
kig her hand in the weedy browngreen water. They
         140

158
jtopped to pick waterlilies and the white flowers of arrow>
!iead that glistened like ice and everything smelt wet rank
of the muddy roots of waterlilies. The cream soda got
warm and they drank it that way and kidded each other
back and forth and Alec caught a crab and covered Janey^s
dress with greenslimy splashes and Janey didn’t care a
bit and they called Joe skipper and he loosened up and
said he was going to join the navy and Alec said he’d be a
civil engineer and build a motorboat and take them all
cruising and Janey was happy because they included her
when they talked just like she was a boy too. At a place
below the Falls where there were locks in the canal they
had a long portage down to the river. Janey carried the
grub and the paddles and the frying pan and the boys
sweated and cussed under the canoe. Then they paddled
across to the Virginia side and made a fire in a little hollow
among gray rusty bowlders. Joe cooked the steak and
Janey unpacked the sandwiches and cookies she’d made
and nursed some murphies baking in the ashes. They
roasted ears of corn too that they had swiped out of a

field beside the canal. Everything turned out fine except
that they hadn’t brought enough butter. Afterwards they

sat eating cookies and drinking rootbeer quietly talking
round the embers. Alec and Joe brought out pipes and
she felt pretty good sitting there at the Great Falls of the
Potomac with two men smoking pipes.
    ^^Geewhizj Janey, Joe cooked that steak fine.”
    ^When we was kids we used to ketch frogs and broil
’em up in Rock Creek . . . Remember, Alec?^”
    ^^Damned if I don’t, and Janey she was along oncej
geewhiz, the fuss you kicked up then, Janey.”
    “I don’t like seeing you skin them.”
    ^We thought we was regular wildwesi hxmters then
We had packs of fun then.”
          like this better, Alec,” said Janey hesitatingly.

                                                                               141

159
            do I  .         said Alec. ^^Dod gast it, I wisht wc
had a watermelon.’^
    ^^Maybe we’ll see some along the riverbank somewhere
goin’ home.”
    ^^Jiminy crickets, what I couldn’t do to a watermelon,

Joe.”
    “Mommer had a watermelon on ice,” said Janey,
^^maybe there’ll be some yet when we get home.”

    ‘^I don’t never want to go home,” said Joe, suddenly
bitter serious.

    ^^Joe, you oughtn’t to talk like that.” She felt girlish
and frightened.

    ^^I’ll talk how I goddam please . . . Kerist, I hate the
scrimpy dump.”
    ^^Joe, you oughtn’t to talk like that.” Janey felt she
was going to cry.
    ^^Dod gast it,” said Alec. ^^It’s time we shoved . . .
What you say, bo               We’ll take one more dip and
then make tracks for home.”
    When the boys were through swimming they all went
up to look at the Falls and then they started off. They
went along fast In the swift stream under the steep tree-
hung bank. The afternoon was very sultry, they went
through layers of hot steamy air. Big cloudheads were
piling up in the north. It wasn’t fun any more for Janey.
She was afraid it was going to rain. Inside she felt sick
and drained out. She was afraid her period was coming
on. She’d only had the curse a few times yet and the
thought of It scared her and took all the strength out of
her, made her want to crawl away out of sight like an
old sick mangy cat. She didn’t want Joe and Alec to
notice how she felt. She thought how woald it be if she
turned the canoe over. The boys could swim ashore all
right, and she’d drown and they’d drag the river for
her body and everybody’d cry and feel so sorry about it.
   Purplegray murk rose steadily and drowned the white
        14a

160
summits of the cloudheads. Everything got to be livifii
white and purple. The boys paddled as hard as they
could. They could hear the advancing rumble of thunder.
The bridge was well in sight when the wind hit them, a
hot stormwind full of dust and dead leaves and bits of
chaff and straw, churning the riverwater.
    They made the shore just in time. “Dod gast it, this

is goin’ to be some storm,” said Alecj “Janey, get under
the boat.” They turned the canoe over on the pebbly
shore in the lee of a big bowlder and huddled up undei

it. Janey sat in the middle with the waterliiies they had
picked that morning all shriveled and clammy from the
 heat in her hand. The boys lay in their damp bathing-

suits on either side of her. Alec’s towsled black hair was

 against her cheek. The other side of her Joe lay with his
 head in the end of the canoe and his lean brown feet and

 legs in their rolledup pants tucked under her dress. The
 smell of sweat and riverwater and the warm boysmell of

 Alec’s hair and shoulders made her dizzy. When the rain
 came drumming on the bottom of the canoe curtaining
 them in vdth lashing white spray, she slipped her arm
 round Alec’s neck and let her hand rest timidly on his

 bare shoulder. He didn’t move.
     The rain passed after a while. “Gee, that wasn’t as bad

 as I thought it would be,” said Alec. They were pretty

 wet and chilly but they felt good in the fresh rainwashed

 air. They put the canoe back in the water and went on

  down as far as the bridge. Then they carried it back to

  the house they’d gotten it from, and went to the little

  shelter to wait for the electric car. They were tired and

  sunburned and sticky. The car was packed with a damp

  Sunday afternoon crowd, picnickers caught by the shower

  at Great Falls and Glen Echo. Janey thought she’d never

  stand it till she got home. Her belly was all knotted up

  with a cramp. When they got to Georgetown the boys stul

  had fifty cents between them and wanted to go to a movie.

161
 but Janey ran off and left them. Her only thought was to

get to bed so that she could put her face into the pillow
and cry.
    After that Janey never cried muchj things upset her
but she got a cold hard feeling all over instead. High-
school went by fast, with hot thunderstormy Washing-
ton summers in between terms, punctuated by an occa-

sional picnic at Marshall Hall or a party at some house in
the neighborhood. Joe got a job at the Adams Express.
She didn’t see him much as he didn’t eat home any more.
Alec had bought a motorcycle and although he was still

in highschool Janey heard little about him. Sometimes
she sat up to get a word with Joe when he came home at
night. He smelt of tobacco and liquor though he never
seemed to be drunk. He went to his job at seven and
when he got out in the evenings he went out with the
bimch hanging round poolrooms on 4)4 Street or playing
craps or bowling. Sundays he played baseball in Mary-
land. Janey would sit up for him, but when he came she’d
ask him how things were going where he worked and
he’d say ‘Tine” and he’d ask her how things were going
at school and she’d say “Fine” and then they’d both go
off to bed. Once in a while she’d ask if he’d seen Alec
and he’d say “Yes” with a scrap of a smile and she’d ask
how Alec was and he’d say “Fine.”
    She had one friend, Alice Dick, a dark stubby girl with
glasses who took all the same classes with her at high-
school. Saturday afternoons they’d dress up in their best
and go window-shopping down F Street way. They’d buy
a few little things, stop in for a soda and come home on
the streetcar feeling they’d had a busy afternoon. Once
in a very long while they went to a matinee at Poll’s and
Janey would take Alice Dick home to supper. Alice Dick
liked the Williamses and they liked her. She said it made
her feel freer to spend a few hours with broadminded
people. Her own folks were Southern Methodists and
        144

162
very narrow. Her father was a clerk in the Government
Printing Office and was m daily dread that his job would
come under the civil service regulations. He was a stout
shortwinded man, fond of playing practical jokes on his
wife and daughter, and suffered from chronic dyspepsia.
    Alice Dick and Janey planned that as soon as they
got through highschool theyM get jobs and leave home.
They even picked out the house where they’d board, a
greenstone house near Thomas Circle, run by a Mrs.
Jenks, widow of a naval officer, who was very refined and
had southern cooking and charged moderately for table-
board.
    One Sunday night during the spring of her last term

in highschool Janey was in her room getting undressed.
Francie and Ellen were still playing in the backyard.
Their voices came in through the open window with a

spicy waft of lilacs from the lilacbushes in the next yard.

She had just let down her hair and was looking in the

mirror imagining how she’d look if she was a peach and
had auburn hair, when there was a knock at the door and

Joe’s voice outside. There was something funny about

 his voice.
     ^^Come in,” she called. ^T’m just fixin’ my hair.”

     She first saw his face in the mirror. It was very white

 and the skin was drawn back tight over the cheekbones

 and round the mouth.
     ^^Why, what’s the matter, Joe?” She jumped up and

 faced him.
     “It’s like this, Janey,” said Joe, drawling his words out

 painfully. “Alec was killed. He smashed up on his motor-

 bike. I just come from the hospital. He’s dead, all right.”

     Janey seemed to be writing the words on a white pad

 in her mind. She couldn’t say anything.
     “He smashed up comin^ home from Chevy Chase . . .

 He’d gone out to the ballgame to see me pitch. You

 oughter seen him all smashed to hell.”

                                                                                145

163
   Janey kept trying to say something.
   “He was your best .     .
   “He was the best guy Pll ever know,” Joe went on

gently. “Well, that’s that, Janey .       .  . But I wanted to

tell you I don’t want to hang round this lousy dump now

that Alec’s gone. I’m gom’ to enlist m the navy. You tell

the folks, see ... I don’t wanna talk to ’em. That’s it.

I’ll join the navy and see the world.”
   “But, Joe . .

   “I’ll write you, Janeyj honest, I will            . .  . I’ll write
you a hell of a lot. You an’ me .             . . Well, goodby,
Janey.” He grabbed her by the shoulders and bssed her
awkwardly on the nose and cheek. All she could do was
whisper. “Do be careful, Joe,” and stand there in front
of the bureau in the gust of lilacs and the yelling of the
kids that came through the open window. She heard Joe’s
steps light quick down the stairs and heard the frontdoor
shut.
    She turned out the light, took off her clothes in the
dark, and got into bed. She lay there without crying.
    Graduation came and commencement and she and Alice
went out to parties and even once with a big crowd on one
of the moonlight trips down the river to Indian Head on
the steamboat Chmles McAhster, The crowd was rougher
than Janey and Alice liked. Some of the boys were drink-
ing a good deal and there were couples kissing and hug-
ging in every shadowy still the moonlight was beautiful
nppling on the river and she and Janey put two chairs
together and talked. There was a band and dancing, but
they didn’t dance on account of the rough men who stood
round the dancefloor making remarks. They talked and
on the way home up the river, Janey, talking very low
and standing by the rail very close to Alice, told her
about Alec. Alice had read about it in the paper but hadn’t
dreamed that Janey had known him so well or felt that
way about him. She began to cry and Janey felt very
         146

164
strong comforting her and they felt that they’d be very
close friends after that. Janey whispered that she’d nevei
be able to love anybody else and Alice said she didn’t
think she could ever love a man anyway, they all drank
and smoked and talked dirty among themselves and had
only one idea.
    In July Alice and Janey got jobs in the office of Mrs.
Robinson, public stenographer in the Riggs Building, to

replace girls away on their vacations. Mrs. Robinson was
a small grayhaired pigeonbreasted woman with a Ken-
tucky shriek in her voice, that made Janey think of a

parrot’s. She was very precise and all the proprieties were
observed in her office. “Miss Williams,” she would chirp,
leaning back from her desk, “that em ess of Judge Rob-

erts’s has absolutely got to be finished today .         . . My
dear, we’ve given our word and we’ll deliver if we have

 CO stay till midnight. Noblesse oblige, my dear,” and the
typewriters would trill and jingle and all the girls’ fingers
would go like mad typing briefs, manuscripts of unde-

livered speeches by lobbyists, occasional overflow from

a newspaperman or a scientist, or prospectuses from real-

 estate offices or patent promoters, dunning letters foi

 dentists and doctors.



                             THE CAMERA EYE (14)


         Sunday nights when we had fishballs and baked beans

  and Mr. Garfield read to us in a very beautiful reading

  voice and everybody was so quiet you could have heard

  a pin drop because he was reading The Mm Without a

  Country and it was a very terrible stoi^ and Aaron Bun

                                                                                 147

165
had been a very dangerous man and this poor young man

had said ''Damn the United States, I never hope to hear

her name again^^ and it was a very terrible thing to say

and the grayhaired judge was so kind and good

       and the judge sentenced me and they took me far

away to foreign lands on a frigate and the officers were

kind and good and spoke in kind grave very sorry read-

ing voices like Mr, Garfield and everything was very

kind and grave and very sorry and frigates and the blue

Mediterranean and islands and when I was dead I began

to cry and I was afraid the other boys would see I had

tears in my eyes

       American shouldffit cry he should look kind and

grave and very sorry when they wrapped me in the stars

and stripes and brought me home on a frigate to be buried

I was so sorry I never remembered whether they brought
me home or buried me at sea but anyway I was wrapped

in Old Glory



                                                    NEWSREEL XI


       the government of the United States must insist and
demand that American citizens who may be taken prisoner
whether by one party or the other as participants in the present
insurrectionary disturbances shall be dealt with in accordance
with the broad principles of international law

              SOLDIERS GUARD CONVENTION
         148

166
        the Titanic left Southampton on April loth on its maidei^
operation is to be performed against the wishes of the New
York Life according to ^‘KimmeF’ Why they know I’m
Kimmel m Niles Fm George to everyone even mother and
sister when we meet on the streets

                          Pm going to Maximus
                          Where jun and frolic beams
                          With all the girls Pll chatter
                          Pll laugh and kiss and flatter
                          Lolo^ Dodoy Jou'jou^
                          Clocloy Margoty Froufrou

  TITANIC LARGEST SHIP IN THE WORLD
                                         SINKING

         personally I am not sure that the twelvehour day is baJ
for employees especially when they insist on working that long
in order to make more money

                          Still all my song shall be
                          Nearer My God to thee
                          Nearer to thee

        it was now about one am, a beautiful starlight night
with no moon. The sea was as calm as a pond, just a gentle
heave as the boat dipped up and down in the swell, an ideal
night except for the bitter cold. In the distance the Titank
looked an enormous length, its great hulk outlined in blacK
against the starry sky, every porthole and saloon blazing with
light
                      ASK METHODISM TO OUST TRINITY

         the hride^s gown is of charmeuse satin with a chiffon
veiled lace waist. The veil is of crefe lisse edged with foini
de venise a defarture from the conventional bridal veil an&
 the bouquet is to he lilies of the valley and gardenias

                          LolOy DodOy JOUjOUy
                           Clocloy Margoty Froufrou
                          Pm going to Maximus
                          And you can go to              .

                                                                                        149

167
         the Titanic slowly tilted straight on end with the stern

 vertically upward and as it did so the lights in the cabins and

saloons which had not flickered for a moment since we left,

 died out, came on again for a single flash and finally went out

altogether. Meanwhile the machinery rattled through the

 vessel with a rattle and a groaning that could be heard for

miles. Then with a quiet slanting dive



                                                                                  JANEY


    “But it’s so interesting, mommer,” Janey would say
when her mother bewailed the fact that she had to work.
“In my day it wasn’t considered ladylike, it was thought
to be demeaning.” “But it isn’t now,” Janey would say
getting into a temper. Then it would be a great relief to
get out of the stuffy house and the stuffy treeshaded

streets of Georgetown and to stop by for Alice Dick and
go down town to the moving pictures and to see the pic-
tures of foreign countries, and the crowds on F Street
and to stop in at a drugstore for a soda afterwards, before
getting on the Georgetown car, and to sit up at the foun-
tain talking about the picture they’d seen and Olive
Thomas and Charley Chaplin and John Bunny. She began
to read the paper every day and to take an interest in
politics. She began to feel that there was a great throb-
bing arclighted world somewhere outside and that only
living in Georgetown where everything was so poky and
oldfashioned, and Mommer and Popper were so poky and
oldfashioned, kept her from breaking into it.
    Postcards from Joe made her feel like that too. He
was a sailor on the battleship Comectiout. There’d be a
picture of the waterfront at Havana or the harbor of
Marseille or Villefranche or a photograph of a girl in
peasant costume inside a tinsel horseshoe and a few lines
         ^50

168
hoping she was well and liked her job, never a word about
himself. She wrote him long letters full of questions about
himself and foreign countries but he never answered them*
Still it gave her a sort of feeling of adventure to get the
postcards. Whenever she saw a navy man on the street or
marines from Quantico she thought of Joe and wondered
how he was getting on. The sight of a gob lurching along
in blue with his cap on one side took a funny twist at her
heart.
    Sundays Alice almost always came out to Georgetown.
The house was different now, Joe gone, her mother and
father older and quieter, Francie and Ellen blooming out
into pretty giggly highschool girls, popular with the boys
in the neighborhood, going out to parties, all the time
complaining because they didnT have any money to spend.
Sitting at the table with them, helping Mommer with
the gravy, bringing in the potatoes or the Brussels sprouts
for Sunday dinner, Janey felt grownup, almost an old
maid. She was on the side of her father and mother now
against the sisters. Popper began to look old and shrunk-
up. He talked often about retiring, and was looking for-
ward to his pension.
   When she’d been eight months with Mrs. Robinson
she got an offer from Dreyfus and Carroll, the patent
lawyers up on the top floor of the Riggs Building to w''ork
for them for seventeen a week, which was five dollars
more than she was getting from Mrs. Robinson. It made
her feel fine. She realized now that she was good at her
work and that she could support herself whatever hap-
pened. On the strength of it she went down to Wood-
ward and Lothrop’s with Alice Dick to buy a dress. She
wanted a silk grownup dress with embroidery on it. She
was twentyone and was going to make seventeen dollars
a week and thought she had a right to one nice dress.
Alice said it ought to be a bronzy gold color to match her

hair. They went in all the stores down F Street, but they
                                                                               xp

169
couldn^t find anything that suited that wasn’t too expen-

sive, so all they could do was buy some materials and
some fashion magazines and take it home to Janey’s
mother to make up. It galled Janey still being dependent
on her mother this way, but there was nothing for it, so
Mrs. Williams had to make up Janey’s new dress the
way she had made all her children’s dresses since they
were born. Janey had never had the patience to learn to
sew the way Mommer could. They bought enough ma-
terial so that Alice could have one too, so Mrs. Williams
had to make up two dresses.
   Working at Dreyfus and Carroll’s was quite different
from working at Mrs. Robinson’s. There were mostly
men in the office. Mr. Dreyfus was a small thinfaced man
with a small black moustache and small black twinkly
eyes and a touch of accent that gave him a distinguished
foreign diplomat manner. He carried yellow wash gloves
and a yellow cane and had a great variety of very much
tailored overcoats. He was the brains of the firm, Jerry
Burnham said. Mr. Carroll was a stout redfaced man
who smoked many cigars and cleared his throat a great
deal and had a very oldtimey Southern Godblessmysoul
way of talking. Jerry Burnham said he was the firm’s
bay window. Jerry Burnham was a wrinklefaced young
man with dissipated eyes who was the firm’s adviser in
technical and engineering matters. He laughed a great
deal, always got into the office late, and for some reason
took a fancy to Janey and used to joke about things to her
while he was dictating. She liked him, though the dis-
sipated look under his eyes scared her off a little. She’d
have liked to have talked to him like a sister, and gotten
him to stop burning the candle at both ends. Then there
was an elderly accountant, Mr. Sills, a shriveled man who
lived in Anacostia and never said a word to anybody.
\t noon he didn’t go out for lunch, but sat at his desk
eating a sandwich and an apple wrapped in waxed paper
        152

170
which he carefully folded afterwards and put back iru
his pocket. Then there were two fresh errandboys and \
little plainfaced typist named Miss Simonds who only
got twelve a week. All sorts of people in every sort of
seedyrespectable or Peacock Alley clothes came in during
the day and stood round in the outer ofSce listening to
Mr. CarrolPs rich boom from behind the groundglasa
door. Mr. Dreyfus slipped in and out without a word,
smiling faintly at his acquaintances, always in a great
mysterious hurry. At lunch in the little cafeteria or at a
sodafountain Janey ^ud tell Alice all about it and Alice
would look up at her admiringly. Alice always waited foi
her in the vestibule at one. TheyM arranged to go out then
because there was less of a crowd. Neither of them ever
spent more than twenty cents, so lunch didn’t take them
very long and they’d have time to take a turn round
Lafayette Square or sometimes round the White House
grounds before going back to the office.
    There was one Saturday night when she had to work
late to finish up typing the description of an outboard
 motor that had to be in at the Patent Office first thing
 Monday morning. Everybody else had left the office. She
 was making out the complicated technical wording as best
 she could, but her mind was on a postcard showing the
 Christ of the Andes she’d gotten from Joe that day. All

 it said was:
     ^^To hell with Uncle Sam’s tin ships. Coming home
 soon.”
     It wasn’t signed but she knew the writing. It worried

 her. Jerry Burnham sat at the telephone switchboard going
  over the pages as she finished them. Now and then he
  went out to the washroom, when he came back each
  time a hot breath of whisky wafted across the office. Janey
  was nervous. She typed till the little black letters squirmed

  before her eyes. She was worried about Joe. How could
  he be coming home before his enlistment was up? Some-

                                                                                 153

171
 thing must be the matter. And Jerry Burnham moving

restlessly round on the telephone girPs seat made her
uncomfortable. She and Alice had talked about the danger
of staying in an office alone with a man like this. Late like

this and drinkings a man had just one idea.
    When she handed him the next to the last sheet his eye,
bright and moist, caught hers.         bet you’re tired, Miss
Williams,” he said. “It’s a darned shame to keep you in

like this and Saturday night too.” “It’s quite all right, Mr.
Burnham,” she said icily and her fingers chirruped. “It’s
the damned old baywindow’s fault. He chewed the rag
so much about politics all day, nobody could get any work
done.” “Well, it doesn’t matter now,” said Janey. “Noth-
ing matters any more. .     .  . It’s almost eight o’clock. I
had to pass up a date with my best girl ... or there-
abouts. I bet you passed up a date too. Miss Williams.”
“I was going to meet another girl, that’s all.” “Now I’ll

tell one   . . He laughed so easily that she found her-
self laughing too.
   When the last page was done and in the envelope,
Janey got up to get her hat. “Look, Miss Williams, we’ll
drop this in the mail and then you’d better come and have
u bite with me.”
    Going down in the elevator Janey intended to excuse
herself and go home but somehow she didn’t and found
herself, everything aflutter inside of her, sitting coolly
down with him in a French restaurant on H Street.
   “Well, what do you think of the New Freedom, Miss
Williams?” asked Jerry Burnham with a laugh after he’d
3at down. He handed her the menu. “Here’s the score-
card . .   . Let your conscience be your guide.”
   “Why, I hardly know, Mr. Burnham.”
   “Well, I’m for it, frankly. I think Wilson’s a big man
. . . Nothing like change anyway, the best thing in the
world, don’t you think so? Bryan’s a big bellowing
blatherskite but even he represents something and even
        154

172
Josephus Daniels filling the navy with grapejuice. I think
there’s a chance we may get back to being a democracy

. . . Maybe there won’t have to be a revolution^ what
do you think?”
    He never waited for her to answei a question, he just
talked and laughed all by himself.
    When Janey tried to tell Alice about it afterwards the
things Jerry Burnham said didn’t seem so funny, nor the
food so good nor everything so jolly. Alice was pretty
bitter about it. “Oh, Janey, how could you go out late at
night with a drunken man and to a place like that and
here I was crazy anxious ... You know a man like that
has only one idea ... I declare I think it was heartless
and light ... I wouldn’t have thought you capable of
such a thing.” “But, Alice, it wasn’t like that at all,”
Janey kept saying, but Alice cried and went round looking
hurt for a whole weekj so that after that Janey kept o£E
the subject of Jerry Burnham. It was the first disagree-
ment she’d ever had with Alice and it made her feel bad
    Still she got to be friends with Jerry Burnham. He
seemed to like taking her out and having her listen to him
talk. Even after he’d thrown up his job at Dreyfus and
Carroll, he sometimes called for her Saturday afternoons
to take her to Keith’s. Janey arranged a meeting with
Alice out in Rock Creek Park but it wasn’t much of a
success. Jerry set the girls up to tea at the old stone mill.
He was working for an engineering paper and writing a
weekly letter for The New York Sun, He upset Alice by
calling Washington a cesspool and a sink of boredom and
saying he was rotting there and that most of the inhabit-
ants were dead from the neck up anyway. When he put
them on the car to go back to Georgetown Alice said em-
phatically that young Burnham was not the sort of boy
a respectable girl ought to know. Janey sat back happily

in the seat of the open car, looking out at trees, girls iiv
summer dresses, men in straw hats, mailboxes, storefronts

                                                                               155

173
sliding by and saidj          Alice, he^s smart as a whip. . . ^
Gosh, I like brainy people, don^t you?^’ Alice looked at
her and shook her head sadly and said nothing.
    That same afternoon they went to the Georgetown
hospital to see Popper. It was pretty horrible. Mommer
and Janey and the doctor and the wardnurse knew that
he had cancer of the bladder and couldn^t live very long
but they didn’t admit it even to themselves. They had
just moved him into a private room where he would be
more comfortable. It was costing lots of money and they’d
had to put a second mortgage on the house. They’d al-
ready spent all Janey’s savings that she had in a bank-
account of her own against a rainy day. That afternoon
they had to wait quite a while. When the nurse came out
With a glass urinal under a towel Janey went in alone.
^^Hello, Popper,” she said with a forced smile. The smell
of disinfectant in the room sickened her. Through the
open window came warm air of sunwilted trees, drowsy
Sundayafternoon noises, the caw of a crow, a distant sound
of trafEc. Popper’s face was drawn in and twisted to one
side. His big moustaches looked pathetically silky and
white. Janey knew that she loved him better than any-
body else in the world . . . His voice was feeble but
fairly firm. ^^Janey, I’m in drydock, girl, and I guess I’ll
never , . . you know better’n I do, the sbnsobitches won’t
tell me . . , Say, tell me about Joe. You hear from him,
don’t you? I wish he hadn’t joined the navyj no future
                                                                 but I’m glad he
for a boy there without pull higher up 5
went to sea, takes after me . . , I’d been three times
round the Horn in the old days before I was twenty.
That was before I settled down in the towboat business,
you understand .   . . But I been thinkin’ here lyin’ in
bed that Joe done just what I’d ’a’ done, a chip of the
old block, and I’m glad of it. I don’t worry about him,
but I wish you girls was married an’ off my hands* I’d
feel easier. I don’t trust girls nowadays with these here
        156

174
ankielength skirts an’ all that.” Popper’s eyes traveled al]
over her with a chilly feeble gleam that made her throat
stiffen when she tried to speak.      guess I can take care of
myselfj” she said. ^^You got to take care of me now. I
done my best by you kids. You don’t know what life is,
none of you, been sheltered and now you ship me off to
die in the hospital.” ^^But, Popper, you said yourself you
thought it would be best to go where you’d get better
care.” “I don’t like that night nurse, Janey, she handles
me too rough ... You tell ’em down at the office.”
    It was a relief when it was time to go. She and Alice
walked along the street without saying anything. Finally
Janey said, ^Tor goodness’ sake, Alice, don’t get sulky.
If you only knew how I hated it all too          .  . . oh, good-
ness, I wish .    . .” ^What do you wish, Janey?” “Oh,
I dunno.”
    July was hot that summer, in the office they worked
m a continual whir of electric fans, the men’s collars
wilted and the girls kept themselves overplastered with
powdery only Mr. Dreyfus still looked cool and crisply
tailored as if he’d just stepped out of a bandbox. The last
day of the month Janey was sitting a minute at her desk
getting up energy to go home along the simmering streets
when Jerry Burnham came in. He had his shirtsleeves
rolled above the elbow and white duck pants on and
carried his coat. He asked her how her father was and
said he was all excited about the European news and would
have to take her out to supper to talk to somebody sooth-
ing. “I’ve got a car belongs to Bugs Dolan and I haven’t
any driver’s license, but I guess we can sneak round the
Speedway and get cooled off all the same.” She tried to
refuse because she ought to go home to supper and Alice
was always so sulky when she went out with Jerry, but
he could see that she really wanted to come and insisted.
    They both sat in the front seat of the Ford and dropped
their coats in the back. They went once round the Speed-

                                                                               157

175
way but the asphalt was like a griddle. The trees and the
brown stagnant river stewed in late afternoon murk like

meat and vegetables m a pot. The heat from the engine

suffocated them. Jerry, his face red, talked incessantly

about war brewing in Europe and how it would be the end

of civilization and the signal for a general workingclass
revolution and how he didnT care and anything that got
him out of Washington, where he was drinking himself

silly with his brains addled by the heat and the Congres-
sional Record, would be gravy to him, and how tired he
was of women who didnT want anything but to get money
out of him or parties or marriage or some goddam thing
or other and how cool and soothing it was to talk to Janey
who wasn’t like that.

    It was too hot so they put off driving till later and
went to the Willard to get something to eat. He insisted
on going to the Willard because he said he had his pockets
full of money and would just spend it anyhow and Janey
was very much awed because she’d never been in a big
hotel before and felt she wasn’t dressed for it and said she
was afraid she’d disgrace him and he laughed and said it
couldn’t be done. They sat in the big long gilt dining
room and Jerry said it looked like a millionaire morgue
and the waiter was very polite and Janey couldn’t &nd
what she wanted to eat on the big bill-of-fare and took
a salad. Jerry made her take a gin fizz because he said it
was coolings it made her feel lightheaded and tall and
gawky. She followed his talk breathless the way she used
to tag along after Joe and Alec down to the carbarns when
she was little.
    After supper they drove round some more and Jerry
got quiet and she felt constrained and couldn’t think of
what to say. They went way out Rhode Island Avenue
and circled round back by the Old Soldiers’ Home. There
was no air anywhere and the staring identical streetlights
 tvent by on either side, lighting segments of monotonous
         158

176
unrustling trees. Even out on the hills there was not a
breath stirring.
    Out in the dark roads beyond the streetlamps it was
better. Janey lost all sense of direction and lay back
breathing in an occasional patch of freshness from a corn-
field or a copse of woods. In a spot where a faint marshy
dampness almost cool drifted across the road Jerry sud-
denly stopped the car and leaned over and kissed her.
Her heart began to beat very fast. She wanted to tell him
not to, but she couldn’t.
         didn’t mean to, but I can’t help it,” he whispered.
^^It’s living in Washington undermines the will ... Or
maybe I’m in love with you, Janey. I don’t know . . ^
Let’s sit in the back seat where it’s cooler.” Weakness
started in the pit of her stomach and welled up through
her. As she stepped out he caught her in his arms. She
let her head droop on his shoulder, her lips against his
neck. His arms were burning hot round her shoulders,
she could feel his ribs through his shirt pressing against
her. Her head started going round in a reek of tobacco
and liquor and male sweat. His legs began pressing up to

hers. She yanked herself away and got into the back seat,
She was trembling. He was right after her. ^^No, no,” she

said. He sat down beside her with his arm round her
waist. ^^Lez have a cigarette,” he said in a shaky voice.
    Smoking gave her something to do, made her feel even
with him. The two granulated red ends of the cigarettes
glowed side by side.
    ^^Do you mean you like me, Jerry?” ^T’m crazy about
you, kid.” “Do you mean you . . . “Want to marry
you . .    . Why the hell not? I dunno . .          . Suppose we
were engaged?” “You mean you want me to marry you?”
“If you like .       . . But don’t you understand 1?he way a

feller feels ... a night like this ... the smell of the
swamp . . . God, I’d give anything to have you.”
    They’d smoked out their cigarettes. They sat a long

177
time without saying a word. She could feel the hairs on

his bare arm against her bare arm.
   “I’m worried about my brother Joe . .         . He’s m the
navy, Jerry, and I’m afraid he’s going to desert or some**
thing ... I think you’d like him. He’s a wonderful

baseball player.”
    “What made you think of him? Do you feel that way
                                                          goddam it, don’t you
towards me? Love’s a swell thing j
realize it’s not the way you feel towards your brother?”
   He put his hand on her knee. She could feel him look-
ing at her in the dark. He leaned over and kissed her
very gently. She liked his lips gentle against hers that
way. She was kissing them. She was falling through cen-
turies of swampy night. His hot chest was against her
breasts bearing her down. She would cling to him bear-
ing her down through centuries of swampy night. Then
all at once in a cold spasm she felt sick, choking for breath
like drowning. She began to fight him. She got her leg
up and pushed him hard in the groin with her knee.
    He let go of her and got out of the car. She could hear
him walking up and down the road in the dark behind
her. She was trembling and scared and sick. After a while
he got in, switched on the light and drove on without
looking at her. He was smoking a cigarette and little
sparks came from it as he drove.
    When he got to the corner of M Street below the
Williams house in Georgetown he stopped and got out
and opened the door for her. She got out not knowing
what to say, afraid to look at him.
    “I suppose you think I ought to apologize to you for
being a swine,” he said.
    “Jerry, I’m sorry,” she said.
    “I’ll be damned if I will ... I thought we w^ere
friends. I might have known there wouldn’t be a woman
in this muck hole with a human spark in her ... I sup-
pose you think you ought to hold out for the wedding
         i6o

178
                              that^s your business.
bells. Go ahead 5                                    I can get what 1
want with any nigger prostitute down the street here . .     .
Good night.” Janey didn^t say anything. He drove oft.
She went home and went to bed.
    All that August her father was dying, full of morphine;^
in the Georgetown hospital. The papers came out every
day with big headlines about war in Europe, Liege, Lou-
vain, Mons. Dreyfus and CarrolPs was in a fever. Big
lawsuits over munitions patents were on. It began to be
whispered about that the immaculate Mr. Dreyfus was
an agent of the German government. Jerry came to see
Janey one noon to apologize for having been so rude that
night and to tell her that he had a job as a war corre-
spondent and was leaving in a week for the front. They
had a good lunch together. He talked about spies and
British intrigue and pan-Slavism and the assassination of
Jaures and the socialist revolution and laughed all the
time and said everything was well on its way to ballyhack.
She thought he was wonderful and wanted to say some-
thing about their being engaged and felt very tender to-
wards him and scared he’d be killed, but suddenly it was
time for her to go back to the office and neither of them
had brought the matter up. He walked back to the Riggs
Building with her and said good-bye and gave her a big
kiss right there in front of everybody and ran off prom-^
ising he’d write from New York. At that moment Alice
camx up on her way to Mrs. Robinson’s and Janey found
herself telling her that she was engaged to be married tc?
Jerry Burnham and that he was going to Europe to the
war as a war correspondent.
   When her father died in early September it was a great
relief to all concerned. Only, coming back from Oak Hill
Cemetery ail the things she’d wanted as a girl came back
to her, and the thought of Alec, and everything seemed so
unhappy that she couldn’t stand it. Her mother was very
quiet and her eyes were very ted and she kept saying that

                                                                               ifti

179
   she was so glad that there’d be room on the lot for her to
   be buried in Oak Hill too. She’d have hated for him to
   be buried in any other cemetery than Oak Hill. It was so

   beautiful and all the nicest people in Georgetown were
   buried there.
       With the insurance money Mrs. Williams did over
   the house and fixed up the two top floors to rent out as
   apartments. That was the chance Janey had been waiting
   for for so long to get a place of* her own and she and Alice
   got a room in a house on Massachusetts Avenue near the
   Carnegie Library, with cooking privileges. So one Satur-
   day afternoon she phoned from the drugstore for a taxicab
   and set out with her suitcase and trunk and a pile of
    framed pictures from her room on the seat beside her.
    The pictures were two color pxnnts of Indians by Reming-
    ton, a Gibson girl, a photograph of the battleship Con-
    necticut in the harbor of Villefranche that Joe had sent
    her and an enlarged photograph of her father in uniform
    standing at the wheel of an imaginary ship against a
    stormy sky furnished by a photographer in Norfolk, Va.
    Then there were two unframed colorprints by Maxfield
    Tarrish that she’d bought recently and a framed snap-
    shot of Joe in baseball clothes. The little picture of Alec
    she’d wrapped among her things in her suitcase. The cab
* smelt musty and rumbled along the streets. It was a crisp
    autumn day, the gutters were full of dry leaves. Janev
    felt scared and excited as if she were starting out all alone
    on a journey.
       That fall she read a great many newspapers and maga-
    zines and The Beloved Vagabond^ by W. J. Locke. She
    began to hate the Germans that were destroying art and
    culture, civilization, Louvain. She waited for a letter from
    Jerry but a letter never came.
        One afternoon she was coming out of the office a little
    late, who shoifld be standing in the hall by the elevator
    but Joe. ^^Hello, Janey,” he said- ^^Gee, you look like a
            162

180
million dollars.” She was so glad to see him she could
hardly speak, could only squeeze his arm tight. ^^1 just
got paid oflF .   . . I thought I better come up here and
see the folks before I spent all my jack .          , . I’ll take
you out and set you up to a big feed an’ a show if you
want .   . He was sunburned and his shoulders were
broader than when he left. His big hands and knotty
wrists stuck out of a newlooking blue suit that was too
tight for him at the waist. The sleeves were too short too-
    ^^Did you go to Georgetown f'” she asked him.
    ^Tare.”
    ^^Did you go up to the cemetery
    ^^Mommer wanted me to go. but what’s the use>^”
    “Poor mother, she’s so sentimental about it      .  . .”
    They walked along. Joe didn’t say anything. It was a
hot day. Dust blew down the street.
    Janey said: “Joe, dear, you must tell me all about your
adventures ... You must have been to some wonderful
places. It’s thrilling having a brother in the navy.”
    “Janey, pipe down about the navy, will ytr^ ... I
don’t want to hear about it. I deserted in B A, see, and
shipped out east on a limey, on an English boat .            . .
That’s a dog’s life too, but anything’s better than the
U.S.N.”
    “But, Joe .     .
    “Ain’t nothin’ to worry about . . .”

    “But, Joe, what happened?”
     “You won’t say a word to a livin’ soul, will you, Janey?
 You see I got in a scrap with a petty officer tried to ride
 me too damn hard. I socked him in the jaw an’ kinda
 mauled him, see, an’ things looked pretty bad for me, so 1
 made tracks for the tall timber.     . . . That’s all.”
     “Oh, Joe, and I was hoping you’d get to be an officer.’"
     “A gob get to be an officer . . . ? A fat chance.”
     She took him to the Mabillion, where Jerry had taken
 her. At the door Joe peered in critically. “Is this the

                                                                                163

181
 ^wellest joint you knoWy Janeyi^ I got a hundred iron men
 in my pocket.”              this is dreadfully expensive . . .

 It’s a French restaurant. And you oughtn’t to spend all

 ^our money on me.” “Who the hell else do you want me
 to spend it on?” Joe sat down at a table and Janey went
back to ’phone Alice that she wouldn’t be home till late.
When she got back to the table, Joe was pulling some

 little packages wrapped in red and greenstriped tissue-
 paper out of his pockets. “Oh, what’s that?” “You open
’em, Janey .   . . It’s yours.” She opened the packages.
They were some lace colb/s and an embroidered table-

cloth. “The lace is Irish ar)d that other’s from Madeira

,  . . I had a Chinee vase for you too but some son of a

bit . . . son of a gun snitched it on me.” “That was
awful sweet of you to think of me ... I appreciate it.”
Joe fidgeted with his knife and fork. “We gotta git a
move on, Janey, or Wf/Il be late for the show ... I got
tickets for ^The Gaidcn of Allah.’”
    When they came nut of the Belasco onto Lafayette
Square that was cod and quiet with a rustle of wind in the
                                                     I seen a real sandstorm
trees Joe said, “Aidt so much 5
onct,” and Janey felt bad about her brother being so
rough and uneducated. The play made her feel like when
she was little, full of uneasy yearn for foreign countries
and a smell of incense and dark eyes and dukes in tail-
coats tossing money away on the gaming tables of Monte
Carlo, monks and the mysterious east. If Joe was only a
little better educated he’d be able to really appreciate all
the interesting ports he visited. He left her on the stoop
of the house on Massachusetts Avenue. ^Where are you
going to stay, Joe?” she asked. “I guess I’ll shove along
back to New York an’ pick up a berth. ,     . . Sailoring’s a
pretty good graft with this war on.” “You mean to-
night?” He nodded. “I wish I had a bed for you but
I couldn’t very well on account of Alice.” “Naw, I doan
vF^nt to hang round this dump ... I jus’ came up to say

182
hello.” ^^Wellj goodnight, Joe, be sure and write.” ^^Good-
                        I sure will.” She watched him walk off
down the street until he went out of sight in the shadows
of the trees. It made her unhappy to see him go all alone
down the shadowed street. It wasn’t quite the shambling
walk of a sailor, but he looked like a working man all
right. She sighed and went into the house. Alice was wait-
mg up for her. She showed Alice the lace and they tried
on the collars and agreed that it was very pretty and
quite valuable.
    Janey and Alice had a good time that winter. They
took to smoking cigarettes and serving tea to their fnends
Sunday afternoons. They read novels by Arnold Bennett
and thought of themselves as bachelor girls. They learned
to play bridge and shortened their skirts. At Christmas
Janey got a hundred dollar bonus and a raise to twenty
a week from Dreyfus and Carroll. She began telling Alice
that she was an old stickinthemud to stay on at Mrs. Rob-
inson’s. For herself she began to have ambitions of a busi-
ness career. She wasn’t afraid of men any more and kidded
back and forth with young clerks in the elevator about
things that would have made her blush the year before.
When Johnny Edwards or Morris Byer took her out to
the movies in the evening she didn’t mind having them
put their arms around her, or having them kiss her once
or twice while she was fumbling in her bag for her latch-
key, She knew just how to catch a boy’s hand by the wrist
and push it away without making any scene when he tried

to get too intimate. When Alice used to talk warningly
about men having just one idea, she’d laugh and say, “Oh,
they’re not so smart.” She discovered that just a little

peroxide in the water when she washed her hair made it

blonder and took away that mousey look. Sometimes when
she was getting ready to go out in the evening she’d put

a speck of rouge on her little finger and rub it very care-

fully on her lips.
                                                                               i6s

183
                           THE CAMERA EYE (15)


       in the mouth of the Schuylkill Mr. Pierce came on

board ninetysix years old and sound as a dollar        He’d

been ofEceboy m Mr. Pierce’s office about the time He’d

enlisted and missed the battle of Antietam on account of

having dysentery so bad and Mr. Pierce’s daughter Mrs.

Black called Him Jack and smoked little brown cigarettes

and we played Fra Diavolo on the phonograph and

everybody was very jolly when Mr. Pierce tugged at his

dundrearies and took a toddy and Mrs. Black lit cigarettes

one after another and they talked about old days and

about how His father had wanted Him to be a priest

and His poor mother had had such trouble getting to-

gether enough to eat for that family of greedy boys and

His father was a silent man and spoke mostly Portugee

and when he didn’t like the way a dish was cooked that

came on the table he’d pick it up and sling it out of the

window and He wanted to go to sea and studied law at

the University and in Mr. Pierce’s office and He sang
        Oh who can tell the ]oy he feels as d*er the foam his

vessel reels

       and He mixed up a toddy and Mr. Pierce pulled at

his dundrearies and everybody was very jolly and they

talked about the schooner Mary Wentworth and how
Colonel Hodgeson and Father Murphy looked so hard

        166

184
on the cheery glass and He mixed up a toddy and Mr,

Pierce pulled at his dundrearies and Mrs. Black smoked

the little brown cigarettes one after another and every-

body was very jolly with Fra Dian)olo playing on the

phonograph and the harbor smell and the ferryboats and

the Delaware all silvernpply used to be all marshes over

there where we used to go duckshooting and He sang

Vittorm with the phonograph

        and Father Murphy got a terrible attack of gout and

had to be carried off on a shutter and Mr. Pierce ninetv

six years old and sound as a dollar took a sip of toddy

and tugged at his dundrearies silveryripply and the har-'

borsmell came on the fresh wind and smoke from thr

shipyards in Camden and lemon rye sugary smell of tod-

dyglasses and everybody was very jolly



                                                    NEWSREEL XII


                  GREEKS IN BATTLE FLEE BEFORE COPS

         Passengers In Sleeping Car Aroused At point of Gun

                    Flovjy nvevy flow
                    Down to the sea
                    Bfight stream bring my loved one
                    Home to me

                      FIGHTING AT TORREON

         at the end of the last campaign, writes Champ Clark,
 Missouri’s brilliant Congressman, I had about collapsed from
                                                                                i6t

185
ov^erwork, nervous tension, loss of sleep and appetite and con-

stant speaking, but three bottles of Electric Bitters made me

allright

                Roosevelt Is Made Leader Of New Party

      BRYAN’S THROAT CUT BY CLARK; AIDS
                                          PARKER

                          TruCy dear oney true
                         Pm trying hard to be
                         But hear me say
                         Ids a very very long long way
                         From the banks of the Seine

        the crime for which Richardson was sentenced to die

in the electric chair was the confessed murder of his former
sweetheart 19 year old Avis Linnell of Hyannis a pupil m the
New England Conservatory of Music at Boston.
        The girl stood in the way of the minister’s marriage to
a society girl and heiress of Brookline both through an en-
gagement that still existed betv/een the two and because of a
condition in which Miss Linnell found herself.
        The girl was deceived into taking a poison given her by
Richardson which, she believed would remedy that condition
and died in her room at the Young Women’s Christian Asso-
ciation.

ROOSEVELT TELLS FIRST TIME HOW US
                                  GOT PANAMA

           100,000 PEOPLE UNABLE TO ENTER BIG HALL
                                     ECHO CHEERING

        at dinnertime the Governor said he hadn’t heard di-
rectly from Mr. Bryan during the day. “At the present rate
of gain,” Mr. Wilson said, “After reading the results of the
fifteenth ballot, I figure it’ll take about 175 more ballots to
land me”
        Redhaired Youth Says Stories of Easy Money Led Him
to Crime
        interest in the case was intensified on Dec, 20 when it
         168

186
became known that the ex-clergyman had mutilated himself
m his cell at the Charles Street JaiL

FIVE MEN DIE AFTER GETTING TO SOUTH
                                         POLE

       DIAZ TRAINS HEAVY GUNS ON BUSINESS SECTION

                   It^s a very very long long way
                   From the hanks of the Seine
                   For a girl to go and stay
                   On the banks of the Saskatchewan


                                        THE BOY ORATOR
                                              OF THE PLATTE




        It was in the Chicago Convention in ^96 that the
prizewinning boy orator the minister’s son whose lipa
had never touched liquor let out his silver voice sa
that it filled the gigantic hall, filled the ears of the
plain people:

    Mr. Chairman and gentlemen of the convention t
        1 would he fresumptuous indeed
                         to present myself against
        the distinguished gentlemen to whom you have
listenedy if this were a mere measuring of abthues;
                       hut this is not a contest between persons*
                 The humblest ciU%en m all the landy
        when clad in the armor of a righteous cause^

                 is stronger than all the hosts of error,
I come to speak to you in defence of a cause as holy
        the cause of Liberty . . .

                                                                               169

187
         a youngish bigmouthed man in a white tie

         barnstormer, exhorter, evangelist,

         his voice charmed the mortgageridden farmers of

the great plains, rang through weatherboarded school-

houses in the Missouri Valley, was sweet in the ears

of small storekeepers hungry for easy credit, melted
men’s innards like the song of a thrush or a mockin’ in

the gray quiet before sunup, or a sudden soar in winter
wheat or a bugler playing taps and the flag flying j



        silver tongue of the plain people:


         .  .  . the man who is employed for wages is as
much a business man as his em^ployer;
        the attorney in a country town is as much a busi-
ness man as the corporation counsel in a great me-
tropolis;
        the merchant in a crossroads store is as much a
business man as the merchant of New York;
        the farmer who goes forth in the morning and
toils all day^ who begins in the spring and toils all
summery and who by the application of brain and
muscle to the natural resources of the country creates
wealthy is as much a business man as the man who goes
upon the hoard of trade and bets upon the price of
grain;
        the miners who go down a thousand feet in the
earth
                or climb two thousand feet upon the cUfs
        and bring forth from their hidingplaces
                        the precious metals
                            to be poured in the channels of tradey
        are as much business men
        170

188
                         as the few financial magnates
                             who
                                 in a back room
                                     corner the money of the worlds


        The hired man and the country attorney sat up
and listened,
        this was big talk for the farmer who’d mortgaged
his crop to buy fertilizer, big talk for the smalltown
hardware man, groceryman, feed and corn merchant,,
undertaker, truckgardener     . . .



        Having behind us
                 the producing masses
                         of this nation and the worlds
        supported by the commercial interests^ the labor-
                 ing interests^ and the toilers everywherey
        we will answer
                                  their demand
                                              for a gold standard
                                                             by saying to them:
You shall not fress down ufon the brow of labor this
                 crown of thornSy
         you shall not crucify mankind U'pon a cross of gold.



         They roared their lungs out {crown of thorns and
 cross of gold)
         carried him round the hall on their shoulders,
 hugged him, loved him, named their children after
 him, nominated him for president,
         boy orator of the Platte,
                                     silver tongue of the plain people.

                                                                                171

189
        But McArthur and Forrest, two Scotchmen in the
Rand, had invented the cyanide process for extracting
gold from ore. South Africa flooded the gold market,
there was no need for a prophet of silver.



        The silver tongue chanted on out of the big
mouth, chanting Pacifism, Prohibition, Fundamental-
ism,
        nibbling radishes on the lecture platform,
        dnnking grapejuice and water,
        gorging big cornbelt meals j
                Bryan grew gray in the hot air of Chau-
tauqua tents, in the applause, the handshakes, the back-
pattings, the cigarsmoky air of committeerooms at
Democratic conventions, a silver tongue in a big
mouth.



                In Dayton he dreamed of turning the trick
again, of setting back the clocks for the plain people,
branding, flaying, making a big joke
                of Darwinism and the unbelieving outlook of
city folks, scientists, foreigners with beards and monkey
morals.



                In Florida he’d spoken every day at noon on
a float under an awning selling lots for Coral Gables
... he had to speak, to feel the drawling voices hush,
feel the tense approving ears, the gust of handclaps.


                Why not campaign again through the length
and

190
        breadth to set up again the tottering word for the
plain
        people who wanted the plain word of God?
                                (^crown of thorns and cross of gold)
        the plain prosperous comfortable word of God
        for plain prosperous comfortable midamerican
folks?


        He was a big eater. It was hot. A stroke kilhid
him.



        Three days later down in Florida the company
delivered
        the electric horse he’d ordered to exercise on
        when he’d seen the electric horse the president
        exercised on in the White House^



                            THE CAMERA EYE (i6)


        it was hot as a bakeoven going through the canai'

from Delaware City and turtles sunning themselves

tumbled off into the thick ocher ripple we made in pass-

ing and He was very gay and She was feeling well for

once and He made us punch of tea and mint and a little

Saint Croix rum but it was hot as the hinges of Delaware

and we saw scarlet tanagers and redwing blackbirds and

kingfishers cackled wrathfully as the yellow wave from

the white bow rustled the reeds and the cattails and the

                                                                               173

191
sweetflag and He talked about lawreform. and what poli-

ticians were like and where were the Good Men in this

country and said Why thinking the way I think I couldn’t

get elected to be notary public in any county in the state

not with all the money in the world no not even dog-

catcher




                         J. WARD MOOREHOUSE


   He was born in Wilmington, Delaware, on the Fourth

jf July. Poor Mrs. Moorehouse could hear the firecrackers
popping and crackling outside the hospital all through
her laborpains. And when she came to a little and they
brought the baby to her she asked the nurse in a trembling
husky whisper if she thought it could have a bad effect
on the baby all that noise, prenatal influence you know.
The nurse said the little boy ought to grow up to be very
patriotic and probably president being born on the
Glorious Fourth and went on to tell a long story about a
woman who’d been frightened by having a beggar stick
his hand out suddenly right under her nose just before
the child was born and the child had been born with six
fingers, but Mrs. Moorehouse was too weak to listen and
went off to sleep. Later Mr. Moorehouse came by on his
way home from the depot where he worked as stationagent
and they decided to call the kid John Ward after Mrs.
Moorehouse’s father who was a farmer in Iowa and pretty
 K^ell off. Then Mr. Moorehouse went roimd to Healy’s
to get tanked up because he was a father and because it
!vas the Glorious Fourth and Mrs. Moorehouse went off
to sleep again.
    Johnny grew up in Wilmington. He had two brothers,
         174

192
Ben and Ed, and three sisters, Myrtle, Edith and Hazel,
but everybody said he was the bright boy of the family
as well as the eldest. Ben and Ed were stronger and
bigger than he was, but he was the marbles champion ol
the public school, getting considerable fame one term by
a corner in agates he maneuvered with the help of a little
Jewish boy named Ike Goldbergs they managed to rent
out agates to other boys for a cent a week for ten.
    When the Spanish War came on everybody in Wil-
mington was filled with martial enthusiasm, all the boys
botheied their parents to buy them Rough Rider suits
and played filibusters and Pawnee Indian wars and
Colonel Roosevelt and Remember the Maine and the
White Fleet and the Oregon steaming through the Straits
of Magellan. Johnny was down on the wharf one summer
evening when Admiral Cervera’s squadron was sighted
in battle formation passing through the Delaware Capes
by a detachment of the state militia who immediately
opened fire on an old colored man crabbing out in the
river. Johnny ran home like Paul Revere and Mrs.
Moorehouse gathered up her six children and pushing
two of them in a babycarriage and dragging the other
four after her, made for the railway station to find her
husband. By the time they^d decided to hop on the next
train to Philadelphia news went round that the Spanish
squadron was just some boats fishing for menhaden and
that the militiamen were being confined in barracks for
drunkenness. When the old colored man had hauled in

his last crabline he sculled back to shore and exhibited to

his cronies several splintery bulletholes in the side of

his skiff.
    When Johnny graduated from highschooi as head of the
debating team, class orator and winner of the prize ossa],

contest with an essay entitled “Roosevelt, the Man of the
Hour,” everybody felt he ought to go to college. But
the financial situation of the family was none too good;

193
his father said, shaking his head. Poor Mrs. Moorehouse
who had been sickly since the birth of her last child had
taken to the hospital to have an operation and would stay

there for some time to come. The younger children had
had measles, whooping cough, scarlet fever and mumps

all year. The amortization on the house was due and Mr.
Moorehouse had not gotten the expected raise that New
Yearns. So instead of getting a job as assistant freight agent
or picking peaches down near Dover the way he had other
summers Johnny went round Delaware, Maryland and
Pennsylvania as agent for a bookdistributing firm. In Sep-
tember he received a congratulatory note from them say-
ing that he was the first agent they had ever had who
sold a hundred consecutive sets of Bryant’s History of the
United States. On the strength of it he went out to West
Philadelphia and applied for a scholarship at the U of
P. He got the scholarship, passed the exams and enrolled
himself as a freshman, indicating BS as the degree he was
working for. The first term he commuted from Wilming-
ton to save the expense of a room. Saturdays and Sundays
he picked up a little money taking subscriptions for Stod-
dard’s Lectures. Everything would have gone right if
his father hadn’t slipped on the ice on the station steps
one January morning in Johnny’s sophomore year and
broken his hip. He was taken to the hospital and one com-
plication after another ensued. A little shyster lawyer,
Ike Goldberg’s father, in fact, went to see Moorehouse,
who lay with his leg in the air in a Balkan frame and
induced him to sue the railroad for a hundred thousand
dollars under the employers’ liability law. The railroad
lawyers got up witnesses to prove that Moorehouse had
been drinking heavily and the doctor who had examined
him testified that he showed traces of having used liquor
the morning of the fall, so by midsummer he hobbled out
of hospital on crutches, without a job and without any
compensation. That was the end of Johnny’s college edu-
        176

194
cation. The incident left in his mind a lasting bitterness
against drink and against his father.
    Mrs. Moorehouse had to write for help from her father
to save the house, but his answer took so long that the
bank foreclosed before it came and it wouldn^t have done
much good anyway because it was only a hundred dollars
in ten dollar bills in a registered envelope and just about
paid the cost of moving to a floor in a fourfamily frame
house down by the Pennsylvania freightyards. Ben left
highschool and got a job as assistant freightagent and
Johnny went into the office of Hillyard and Miller, Real
Estate, Myrtle and her mother baked pies evenings and
made angelcake to send to the Woman^s Exchange and
Mr. Moorehouse sat in an invalid chair in the front parlor
cursing shyster lawyers and the lawcourts and the Penn-
sylvania Railroad.
    This was a bad year for Johnny Moorehouse. He was
twenty and didn’t drink or smoke and was keeping him-
self clean for the lovely girl he was going to marry, a
girl in pink organdy with golden curls and a sunshade.
He’d sit in the musty little office of Hillyard and Miller,
listing tenements for rent, furnished rooms, apartments,
desirable lots for sale, and think of the Boer war and the
Strenuous Life and prospecting for gold. From his desk
he could see a section of a street of frame houses and a
couple of elmtrees through a grimy windowpane. In front
of the window was in summer a conical wiremesh flytrap
where caught flies buzzed and sizzled, and in winter a

little openface gas-stove that had a peculiar feeble whistle

all its own. Behind him, back of a groundglass screen that
went part way to the ceiling Mr. Hillyard and Mr
Miller sat facing each other at a big double desk, smok-
ing cigars and fiddling with papers. Mr. Hillyard was a
sallowfaced man with black hair a little too long who
had been on the way to making a reputation for himself

as a criminal lawyer when, through some scandal that no-

                                                                               177

195
body ever mentioned as it was generally agreed in Wil'
mmgton that he had lived it down, he had been disbarred.
Mr. Miller was a little roundfaced man who lived with

his elderly mother. He had been forced into the realestate

business by the fact that his father had died leaving him
building lots scattered over Wilmington and the outskirts

of Philadelphia and nothing else to make a living from.
Johnny’s job was to sit in the outer office and be polite

to prospective buyers, to list the properties, attend to ad-

vertising, type the firm’s letters, empty the wastebaskets
and the dead flies out of the flytrap, take customers to

visit apartments, houses and buildinglots and generally
make himself useful and agreeable. It was on this job that
he found out that he had a pair of bright blue eyes and
that he could put or. an engaging boyish look that people
liked. Old ladies looking for houses used to ask specially
to have that nice young man show them round, and busi-
ness men who dropped in for a chat with Mr. Hillyard
or Mr. Miller would nod their heads and look wise and
say, “Bright boy, that.” He made eight dollars a week.
    Outside of the Strenuous Life and a lovely girl to fall
in love with him there was one thing Johnny Moore-
house’s mind dwelt on as he sat at his desk listing desir-
able five and sevenroom dwelling-houses, drawingroom,
diningroom, kitchen and butler’s pantry, three master’s
bedrooms and bath, maid’s room, water, electricity, gas,
 healthy location on gravelly soil in restricted residential
area; He wanted to be a songwriter. He had a fair tenor
Voice and could carry Larboard Watch Ahoy or I Dreamed
I Dwelt in Marble Halls or Through Pleasures and Pal-
aces Sadly I Romn very adequately. Sunday afternoons he
took music lessons with Miss O’Higgins, a shriveled little
Irishwoman, unmarried, of about thirtyfive, who taught
him the elements of the piano and listened with rapture
to his original compositions that she took down for him
         178

196
on musicpaper that sli» *iad all ready ruled when he came
One song that began

          Ohy show me the stc^te where the 'peaches bloom
          Where mmds are fair . . . It^s Delaware

she thought good enough to send to a music publisher in
Philadelphia, but it came back, as did his next composi-
tion that Miss O^Higgins—he called her Marie by this
time and she declared she couldn^t take any money from
him for her lessons, at least not until he was rich and had
made a name for himself—that Marie cried over and said
was as beautiful as MacDowell. It began

              The silver bay of Delaware
              Rolls through peachblossoms to the sea
              And whm my heart is bowed with care
              Its memory sweet comes hack to me^

     Miss O’Higgins had a little parlor with gilt chairs in

 it where she gave her music lessons. It was very heavily
 hung with lace curtains and with salmoncolored brocaded
 portieres she had bought at an auction. In the center was
 a black walnut table piled high with worn black leather
 albums. Sunday afternoons after the lesson was over she’d
 bring out tea and cookies and cinnamon toast and Johnny
 would sit there sprawled in the horsehair armchair that
 had to have a flowered cover over it winter and summer
 on account of its being so worn and his eyes would be so
 blue and he’d talk about things he wanted to do and poke
 fun at Mr. Hillyard and Mr, Miller and she’d tell him
 stories of great composers, and her cheeks would flush
  and she’d feel almost pretty and feel that after all there
  wasn’t such a ternble disparity in their ages. She supported
  by her music lessons an invalid mother and a father whe
  had been a wellkiiown baritone and patriot in Dublin in

  his younger days but who had taken to drink and she was
  madly in love with Johnny Moorehouse.

                                                                                 179

197
   Johnny Moorehouse worked on at Hillyard and Mil

ler’s sitting in the stuffy office, chafing when he had noth-

ing to do until he thought he’d go mad and run amok
and kill somebody, sending songs to the music publishers

that they always sent back, reading the Success Magaztne^

full of sick longing for the future: to be away from Wil-
mington and his father’s grumbling and pipesmokmg and
the racket his little brothers and sisters made and the
smell of corned beef and cabbage and his mother’s wrin-
kled crushed figure and her overworked hands.
    But one day he was sent down to Ocean City, Mary-
land, to report on some lots the firm had listed there. Mr.
Hillyard would have gone himself only he had a car-
buncle on his neck. He gave Johnny the return ticket and
ten dollars for the trip.

    It was a hot July afternoon. Johnny ran home to get
a bag and to change his clothes and got down to the sta-
tion just m time to make the train. The ride was hot and
sticky down through peachorchards and pinebarrens under
a blazing slaty sky that flashed back off sandy patches in
scraggly cornfields and whitewashed shacks and strips of
marshwater. Johnny had taken off the jacket of his gray
flannel suit and folded it on the seat beside him to keep
it from getting mussed and laid his collar and tie on top
of it so that they’d be fresh when he got in, when he
noticed a darkeyed girl in a ruffled pink dress and a wide
white leghorn hat sitting across the aisle. She was consid-
erably older than he was and looked like the sort of fash-
ionably dressed woman who’d be in a parlorcar rather than
in a daycoach. But Johnny reflected that there wasn’t any
parlorcar on this train. Whenever he wasn’t looking at
her, he felt that she was looking at him.
   The afternoon grew overcast and it came on to rain,
big drops spattered against the car windows. The girl
in pink ruffles was struggling to put her window down.
He jumped over and put it down for her. “Allow me,”
        r8o

198
he said. ^^Thanks.” She looked up and smiled into hia
eyes. ^^Oh, it^s so filthy on this horrid train.” She showed
him her white gloves all smudged from the window-
fastenings. He sat down again on the inside edge of his
seat. She turned her full face to him. It was an irregular
brown face with ugly lines from the nose to the ends of
the mouth, but her eyes set him tingling. ^^You won^t
think it’s too unconventional of me if we talk, will you?”
she said, “I’m bored to death on this horrid train, and
there isn’t any parlorcar though the man in New York
swore that there was.”
    “I bet you been traveling all day,” said Johnny, look-
ing shy and boyish.

    ^Worse than that. I came down from Newport on the
boat last night.”
   The casual way she said Newport quite startled him,
“I’m going to Ocean City,” he said.
    “So am I. Isn’t it a horrid place? I wouldn’t go there
for a minute if it weren’t for Dad. He pretends to like it.”
   “They say that Ocean City has a great future ... I
mean in a kind of a realestate way,” said Johnny.
   There was a pause,
    “I got on in Wilmington,” said Johnny with a smile*
   “A horrid place, Wilmington ... I can’t stand it.”
   “I was born and raised there  . . I suppose that’s why
I like it,” said Johnny.
    “Oh, I didn’t mean there weren’t awfully nice people
in Wilmington . . . lovely old families . . . Do you
know the Rawlinses?”
    “Oh, that’s all right ... I don’t want to spend all
my life in Wilmington, anyway . . , Gosh, look at it

rain.”
    It rained so hard that a culvert was washed out and
the train was four hours late into Ocean City. By the time

                                                           it had thundered and
they got in they were good friends 5
lightened and she’d been so nervous and he’d acted very
                                                                               181

199
 strong and protecting and the car had filled up with mos-
 quitoes and they had both been eaten up and they’d gotten
 very hungry together. The station was pitchblack and
 there was no porter and it took him two trips to get her
 bags out and even then they almost forgot her alligator-
 skin handbag and he had to go back into the car a third
 time to get it and his own suitcase. By that time an old
 darkey with a surrey had appeared who said he was from
 the Ocean House. “I hope you’re going there too,” she
 said. He said he was and they got in though they had no
 place to put their feet because she had so many bags.
 There were no lights in Ocean City on account of the
 storm. The surreywheels ground through a deep sandbedj
 now and then that sound and the clucking of the driver
at his horse were drowned by the roar of the surf from the
beach. The only light was from the moon continually
 hidden by driving clouds. The rain had stopped but the
tense air felt as if another downpour would come any
minute. “I certainly would have perished in the storm if
it hadn’t been for you,” she said; then suddenly she of-
fered him her hand like a man: “My name’s Strang . . ,
Annabelle Marie Strang. .   . . Isn’t that a funny name?”
He took her hand. “John Moorehouse is mine   .  . . Glad
to meet you, Miss Strang.” The palm of her hand was
hot and dry. It seemed to press into his. When he let go
he felt that she had expected him to hold her hand longer.
She laughed a husky low laugh. “Now we’re introduced,
Mr. Moorehouse, and everything’s quite all right ... I
certainly shall give Dad a piece of my mind. The idea of
his not meeting his only daughter at the station.”
   In the dark hotel lobby lit by a couple of smoked oil-
lamps he saw her, out of the corner of his eye, throw her
arms round a tall whitehaired man, but by the time he
had scrawled John W^. Moorehouse in his most forceful
handwriting in the register and gotten his roomkey from
the clerk, they had gone. Up in the little pine bedroom
        182

200
it was very hot. When he pulled up the window, the ’oar
of the surf came in through the rusty screen mingling
with the rattle of rain on the roof. He changed his collar
and washed in tepid water he poured from the cracked
pitcher on the washstand and went down to the dining-
room to try to get something to eat. A goat-toothed wait-
ress was just bringing him soup when Miss Strang came
in followed by the tall man. As the only lamp was on the
table he was sitting at, they came towards it and he got
Up and smiled. “Here he is. Dad,” she said. “And you
owe him for the driver that brought us from the sta-

tion .    . . Mr. Morris, you must meet my father. Dr.
 Strang .   . . The name was Morris, wasn’t it?” Johnny
 blushed. “Moorehouse, but it’s quite all right. . . . I’m
 glad to meet you, sir.”
     Next morning Johnny got up early and went round to

 the office of the Ocean City Improvement and Realty
 Company that was in a new greenstained shingled bun-
 galow on the freshly laidout street back of the beach.
 There was no one there yet so he walked round the town.

 It was a muggy gray day and the cottages and the frame

 stores and the unpainted shacks along the railroad track

 looked pretty desolate. Now and then he slapped a mos-

 quito on his neck. He had on his last clean collar and he

 was worried for fear it would get wilted. Whenever he

 stepped off the board sidewalks he got sand in his shoes,

  and sharp beachburrs stuck to his ankles. At last he found

  a stout man in a white linen suit sitting on the steps of the

  realestate office. “Good morning, sir,” he said. “Are you

  Colonel Wedgewood?” The stout man was too out of

  breath to Answer and only nodded. He had one big silk

  handkerchief stuck into his collar behind and with another

  was mopping his face. Johnny gave him the letter he had

  from his firm and stood waiting for him to say something.
   The fat man read the letter with puckered brows and led

   the way into the office. “It’s this asthma,” he gasped be-

                                                                                  183

201
tween great wheezing breaths. “Cuts ma wind when Ah
trah to hurry. Glad to meet you, son.”
   Johnny hung round old Colonel Wedgewood the rest
of the morning, looking blue-eyed and boyish, listening
politely to stones of the Civil War and General Lee and
his white horse Traveller and junketings befoa de woa on
the Easten Shoa, ran down to the store to get a cake of ice

for the cooler, made a little speech about the future of
Ocean City as a summer resort—“Why, what have they
got at Atlantic City or Cape May that we haven^t got
here?” roared the Colonel—^went home with him to his
bungalow for lunch, thereby missing the train he ought to
have taken back to Wilmington, refused a mint julep—he
neither drank nor smoked—^but stood admiringly by while
the Colonel concocted and drank two good stiff ones, for
his asthma, used his smile and his blue eyes and his boyish
shamble on the Colonel’s colored cook Mamie and by four
o’clock he was laughing about the Governor of North
Carolina and the Governor of South Carolina and had ac-
cepted a job with the Ocean City Improvement and Realty
Company at fifteen dollars a week, with a small furnished
cottage thrown m. He went back to the hotel and wrote
Mr. Hillyard, inclosing the deeds for the lots and his
expense account, apologized for leaving the firm at such
short notice but explained that he owed it to his family
who were in great need to better himself as much as he
            then he wrote to his mother that he was staying
could 3
on in Ocean City and please to send him his clothes by
               he wondered whether to write Miss O’Higgins,
express 3
but decided not to. After all, bygones were bygones.
    When he had eaten supper he went to the desk to ask
for his bill, feeling pretty nervous for fear he wouldn’t
have enough money to pay it, and was just coming out
with two quarters in his pocket and his bag in his hand
when he met Miss Strang. She was with a short dark man
m white flannels whom she introduced as Monsieur de la
         184

202
Rochevillaine. He was a Frenchman but spoke good Eng-
lish. “I hope you’re not leaving us/’ she said. ^^No, ma’anij
I’m just moving down the beach to one of Colonel Wedge^
wood’s cottages.” The Frenchman made Johnny uneasy;,
he stood smiling suave as a barber beside Miss Strang
^^Oh, you know our fat friend, do you? He’s a great cron}
of Dad’s. I think he’s just too boring with his white horse
Traveller.” Miss Strang and the Frenchman smiled both
at once as if they had some secret in common. The French-
man stood beside her swinging easily on the balls of hi'?
feet as if he were standing beside some piece of furniture
he owned and was showing off to a friend. Johnny had a
notion to paste him one right where the white flanneJ
bulged into a pot belly. ^Well, I must go,” he said
  Won’t you come back later? There’s going to be dancing
We’d love to have you.” ^Wes, come back by all means,’'
said the Frenchman.        will if I can,” said Johnny and
walked off with his suitcase in his hand, feeling sticky
under the collar and sore. “Drat that Frenchman,” he
said aloud. Still, there was something about the way Miss
Strang looked at him. He guessed he must be failing in
love.
    It was a hot August, the mornings still, the afternoons
piling up sultry into thundershowers. Except when there
were clients to show about the scorched sandlots and pine-
barrens laid out into streets, Johnny sat in the office alone
under the twoflanged electric fan. He was dressed in white
flannels and a pink tennis shirt rolled up to the elbows,
drafting the lyrical description of Ocean City (Maryland)
that was to preface the advertising booklet that was the
Colonel’s pet idea: “The lifegiving surges of the broad
Atlantic beat on the crystalline beaches of Ocean City
(Maryland) ... the tonic breath of the pines brings re-^

lief to the asthmatic and the consumptive . . . nearby the
sportsman’s paradise of Indian River spreads out its broad
estuary teeming with . . In the afternoon the Colonel

                                                                               185

203
would come in sweating and wheezing and Johnny would
read him what he had written and he’d say, ^^Bully, ma
boy, bully,” and suggest that it be all done over. And
Johnny would look up a new batch of words in a dogeared
^^Century Dictionary” and start off again.

    It would have been a fine life except that he was in

love. Evenings he couldn’t keep away from the Ocean
House. Each time he walked up the creaking porch steps

past the old ladies rocking and fanning with palmleaf

fans, and went through the screen doors into the lobby
he felt sure that this time he’d find Annabelle Marie
alone, but each time the Frenchman was with her as smil-
ing and cool and potbellied as ever. They both made a
fuss over Johnny and petted him like a little dog or a
                            she taught him to dance the ^^Boston,”
precocious child 3
and the Frenchman, who it turned out was a duke or a
baron or something, kept offering him drinks and cigars
and scented cigarettes. Johnny was shocked to death when
he found out that she smoked, but somehow it went with
dukes and Newport and foreign travel and that sort of
thing. She used some kind of musky perfume and the
smell of it and the slight rankness of cigarettesmoke m
her hair made him dizzy and feverish when he danced
with her. Some nights he tried to tire out the Frenchman
playing pool, but then she’d disappear to bed and he’d
have to go off home cursing under his breath. While he
undressed he could still feel a little tingle of musk in his
nostrils. He was trying to make up a song:

                            By the moonlight sea
                            I fine for thee
                            Annabelle Marie . .     .

Then it ’ud suddenly sound too damn silly and he’d stride
up and down his little porch in his pajamas, with the mos-
quitoes shrilling about his head and the pound of the sea
and the jeer of the dryflies and katydids in his ears, curs-
         186

204
ing being young and poor and uneducated and planning
how he^d make a big enough pile to buy out every damn
                     then he^d be the one sheM love and look up
Frenchman 3
to and he wouldn’t care i£ she did have a few damn
Frenchmen for mascots if she wanted them. He’d clench
his fists and stride around the porch mutteringj ^^By gum,
I can do it.”
    Then one evening he found Annabelle Marie alone.
The Frenchman had gone on the noon train. She seemed
glad to see Johnny, but there was obviously something on
her mind. She had too much powder on her face and her
                            perhaps she’d been crying. It was moon-
eyes looked red 3
light. She put her hand on his arm, ^^Moorehouse, walk
down the beach with me,” she said. “I hate the sight of

all these old hens in rockingchairs.” On the walk that led

across a scraggly lawn down to the beach they met Dr.

 Strang.
     ^What’s the matter with Rochevillaine, Annie he

 said. He was a tall man with a high forehead. His lips

 were compressed and he looked worried.
     ^^He got a letter from his mother ... She won’t let

 him.”
     ^^He’s of age, isn’t Iie^”
     ^^Dad, you don’t understand the French nobility      . .   .

 The family council won’t let him      . . . They could tie up

 his income.”
     'Tou’ll have enough for two ... I told him that.”

     ^^Oh, shut up about it, can’t you? .     . .” She suddenly

 started to blubber like a child. She ran past Johnny and

  back to the hotel, leaving Johnny and Dr. Strang facing

  each other on the narrow boardwalk. Dr. Strang saw

  Johnny for the first time. ''H’m . .        . excuse us,” he said

  as he brushed past and walked with long strides up the

  walk, leaving Johnny to go down to the beach and look

  at the moon all by himself.
      But the nights that followed Annabelle Marie did walk

                                                                                 187

205
out along the beach with him and he began to feel that
perhaps she hadn’t loved the Frenchman so much after

all. They would go far beyond the straggling cottages and
build a fire and sit side by side looking into the flame.
Their hands sometimes brushed against each other as they
              when she’d want to get to her feet he’d take hold
walked j
of her two hands and pull her up towards him and he
always planned to pull her to him and kiss her but he
hadn’t ihe nerve. One night was very warm and she sud-
denly suggested they go in bathing. ^^But we haven’t our
suits.” “Haven’t you ever been in without? It’s much
better .   .  . Why, you funny boy, I can see you blushing
even in the moonlight.” “Do you dare me?” “I double-
dare you.”
    He ran up the beach a way and pulled off his clothes
and went very fast into the water. He didn’t dare look and
only got a glimpse out of the corner of an eye of white
legs and breasts and a wave spuming white at her feet.
 While he was putting his clothes on again he was won-
dering if he wanted to get married to a girl who’d go in
swimming with a fellow all naked like that, anyway. He
wondered if she’d done it with that damn Frenchman.
“You were like a marble faun,” she said when he got back
 beside the fire where she was coiling her black hair round
 her head. She had hairpins in her mouth and spoke
 through them. “Like a very nervous marble faun ... I
 got my hair wet.” He hadn’t intended to but he suddenly
 pulled her to him and kissed her. She didn’t seem at all
 put out but made herself little in his arms and put her
 face up to be kissed again. “Would you marry a feller like
 me without any money?” “I hadn’t thought of it, darling,
 but I might.”
     “You’re pretty wealthy, I guess, and I haven’t a cent,
 and I have to send home money to my folks .      . . but I
 have prospects.”
     “What kind of prospects?” She pulled his face down
          i88

206
and ruffled his hair and kissed him, ^^lUl make good in thia
realestate game. I swear I will.’^ ^Will it make good, poor
baby?” ^Tou^re not so much oldeFn me . .       . How old
are you, Annabelle?” ''Well, I admit to twentyfour, but
you mustn^t tell anybody, or about tonight or anything.”
"Who would I be telling about it, Annabelle Marie?”
Walking home, something seemed to be on her mind be-
cause she paid no attention to anything he said. She kept
humming under her breath.
    Another evening they were sitting on the porch of his
cottage smoking cigarettes—he would occasionally smoke
a cigarette now to keep her company—^he asked her what
It was worrying her. She put her hands on his shoulders
and shook him: "Oh, Moorehouse, youVe such a fool . ,   .
but I like it.” "But there must be something worrying you,
Annabelle ... You didn’t look worried the day we came
down on the tram together.” "If I told you . . . Gra-
cious, I can imagine your face.” She laughed her hard
gruff laugh that always made him feel uncomfortable
^Well, I wish I had the right to make you tell me . .           ,
You ought to forget that damn Frenchman.” "Oh, you’re
such a little innocent,” she said. Then she got up and
waited up and down the porch.
    '“'Won’t you sit down, Annabelle? Don’t you like me
even a little bit?”
    She rubbed her hand through his hair and down across
his face. "Of course I do, you httle blue-eyed ninny .      .  i
But can’t you see it’s everything driving me wild, all those
old cats round the hotel talk about me as if I was a scarlet
woman because I occasionally smoke a cigarette in my own
room .   ,  . Why, in England some of the most aristo-
cratic women smoke right in public without anybody say-
ing 'boo’ to them .    .  . And then I’m worried about Dad5
he’s sinking too much money in realestate. I think he’ti
losing his mind.”

                                                                               189

207
   ^^But there’s every indication of a big boom coming
down here. It’ll be another Atlantic City in time.”
   “Now look here, ’fess up, how many lots have been sold

this month
   “Well, not so many . .  But there are some important

sales pending . . . There’s that corporation that’s going

to build the new hotel.”
   “Dad’ll be lucky if he gets fifty cents out on the dol-

lar .. . and he keeps telling me how rattlebrained I am.
He’s a physician and not a financial wizard and he ought

to realize it. It’s all right for somebody like you who has
nothing to lose and a way to make in the world to be mess-
ing around in realestate ... As for that fat Colonel I

don’t know whether he’s a fool or a crook.”
   “What kind of a doctor is your father?”
   “Do you mean to say you never heard of Dr. Strang?
He’s the best known nose and throat specialist in Phila-
delphia . .   . Oh, it’s so cute . . .” She kissed him on the
cheek “, .  . and ignorant . . .” she kissed him again . . .
“and pure.” “I’m not so pure,” he said quickly and looked
at her hard in the eyes. Their faces began to blush looking
at each other. She let her head sink slowly on his shoulder.
   His heart was pounding. He was dizzy with the smell
of her hair and the perfume she wore. He pulled her to
her feet with his arm round her shoulders. Tottering a
little, her leg against his leg, the stiffness of her corset
against his ribs, her hair against his face, he pulled her
through the little livmgroom into the bedroom and locked
the door behind them. Then he kissed her as hard as he
could on the lips. She sat down on the bed and began t-
take off her dress, a little coolly he thought, but he’d gon^
too far to pull back. When she took off her corset she
flung it in the corner of the room. “There,” she said. “I
hate the beastly things.” She got up and walked toward*^
him In her chemise and felt for his face in the dark.
         IQO

208
‘What’s the matter, darling?” she whispered fiercely.
“Are you afraid of me?”
   Everything was much simpler than Johnny expected.
They giggled together while they were dressing. Walking
back along the beach to the Ocean House, he kept think-
ing: “Now she’ll have to marry me.”
    In September a couple of cold northeasters right after
Labor Day emptied the Ocean House and the cottages.
The Colonel talked bigger about the coming boom and his
advertising campaign, and drank more. Johnny took his
meals with him now instead of at Mrs. Ames’ boarding-
house. The booklet was finished and approved and Johnny
had made a couple of trips to Philadelphia with the text
and the photographs to get estimates from printers. Run-
ning through Wilmington on the train without getting
off there gave him a pleasant feeling of independence.
Dr. Strang looked more and more worried and talked
about protecting his investments. They had not talked of
Johnny’s engagement to his daughter, but it seemed to be
understood. Annabelle’s moods were unaccountable. She
kept saying she was dying of boredom. She teased and
nagged at Johnny continually. One night he woke sud-
denly to find her standing beside the bed. “Did I scare
you?” she said. “I couldn’t sleep . . . Listen to the surf.”
The wind was shrilling round the cottage and a tremen-
dous surf roared on the beach. It was almost daylight be-
fore he could get her to get out of bed and go back to the

hotel. “Let ’em see me ... I don’t care,” she said. An-
other time when they were walking along the beach she
was taken with nausea and he had to stand waiting while

she was sick behind a sanddune, then he supported her,

white and trembling, back to the Ocean House. He was
worried and restless. On one of his trips to Philadelphia

he went round to The Public Ledger to see if he could get

a job as a reporter.
    One Saturday afternoon he sat reading the paper in th©

                                                                               191

209
lobby o£ the Ocean House. There was no one else there,
most o£ the guests had left. The hotel would close the

fifteenth. Suddenly he found himself listening to a con-

versation. The two bellhops had come in and were talking

in low voices on the bench against the wall.
   ^Well, I got mahn awright this summer, damned if 1

didn^t, Joe.”
    “I would of too if I hadn’t gotten sick.”
   ^^Didn’t I tell you not to monkey round with that
Lizzie^ Man, I b’lieve every sonofabitch in town slep’ with
that jane, not excludin’ niggers.”

    ^^Say, did you ... You know the blackeyed on&^ You
^aid you would.”
   Johnny froze. He held the paper rigid in front of him.
   The bellhop gave out a low whistle. ^^Hotstuff,” he
said. “Jeez, what these society dames gits away with ’s
got me beat.”
   “Didye, honest?”
   “Well, not exactly . . . ’Fraid I might ketch some-
thin’. But that Frenchman did . .       . Jeez, he was in her
room all the time.”
   “I know he was. I caught him onct.” They laughed.
“They’d forgot to lock the door.”
   “Was she all neked?”
   “I guess she was .     . , under her kimono .        .  . He’s
cool as a cucumber and orders icewater.”
   “Whah didn’t ye send up Mr. Greeley?”
   “Hell, why should V Frenchman wasn’t a bad scout.
He gave me five bucks.”
    “I guess she can do what she goddam pleases. Her dad
about owns this dump, they tell me, him an ole Colonel
Wedgewood.”
   “I guess that young guy in the realestate office is gettin’
it now . . . looks like he’d marry her.”
    “Hell, Fd marry her maself if a girl had that mucia
kale,”

        192

210
   Johnny was in a cold sweat. He wanted to get out ol
the lobby without their seeing him. A bell rang and one
of the boys ran off. He heard the other one settling him-
self on the bench. Maybe he was reading a magazine or
something. Johnny folded up the paper quietly and
walked out onto the porch. He walked down the streef
without seeing anything. For a while he thought he’d go
down to the station and take the first train out and throw
the whole business to ballyhack, but there was the booklet
to get out, and there was a chance that if the boom did
come he might get in on the ground floor, and this con-
                                                               opportunity knocks
nection with money and the Strangs j
but once at a young man’s door. He went back to his cot-
tage and locked himself in his bedroom. He stood a
minute looking at himself in the glass of the bureau. The
neatly parted light hair, the cleancut nose and chinj the
image blurred. He found he was crying. He threw him-
self face down on the bed and sobbed.
    When he went up to Philadelphia the next time to read
proof on the booklet
                       OCEAN CITY (Maryland)

                            VACATIONLAND SUPREME

    He also took up a draft of the v/eddmg invitations to
be engraved:
                              Dr, Alonso B. Strang
               mnounces the marriage of his daughter
                                  Annahelle Mane
                        to Mr, J, Ward Moorehouse
        at Saint Stefhen^s Protestant Efiscofal Churchy Ger-
     rmntowny Pennsylvanhy on November -fifteenth nine--

    teen hundred and nine at twelve noon

     Then there was an invitation to the reception to be sent

to a special list. It was to be a big wedding because Dr.
 Strang had so many social obligations. Annabelle decided

                                                                                193

211
                               T




 on j. Ward Moorehouse as more distinguished than John
 W. and began to call him Ward. When they asked him
about inviting his family he said his mother and father
 were both invalids and his brothers and sisters too little to
enjoy it. He wrote his mother that he was sure she’d
understand^ but that as things were and with Dad the way
he was ... he was sure she’d understand. Then one
evening Annabelle told him she was going to have a baby,
         thought maybe that was it.”
    Her eyes were suddenly scarmgly cold black in his. He
hated her at that minute, then he smiled blue-eyed and
boyish. “I mean you being so nervous and everything.”
He laughed and took her hand. ^Well, I’m goin’ to make
you an honest woman, ain’t P” He had the drop on her
now. He kissed her.
    She burst out crying.
    ^^Oh, Ward, I wish you wouldn’t say ^ain’t.’ ”

    “I was just teasing, dear . .        . But isn’t there some
way?”
    ^T’ve tried everything , . . Dad would know, but I
don’t dare tell him. He knows I’m pretty independent

,  . . but . .
     We’ll have to stay away for a year after we’re mar-
ried . . . It’s rotten for me. I was just offered a job on
The Public Ledger
    “We’ll go to Europe . . , Dad’ll fix us up for our
honeymoon . , . He’s glad to get me off his hands and
I’ve got money in my own right, mother’s money.”
    “Maybe it’s all a mistake.”
    “How can it be?”
    “How long is it since you .     . . noticed ... ?”
   Her eyes were suddenly black and searching in his
again. They stared at each other and hated each other.
“Quite long enough,” she said and pulled his ear as if
he were a child, and went swishing upstairs to dress. The

212
Colonel was tickled to death about the engagement and
had invited them all to dinner to celebrate it.
                                                                      Ward Moore-
    The wedding came off in fine style and J.
house found himself the center of all eyes in a wellfitting
frock coat and a silk hat. People thought he was very
handsome. His mother back in Wilmington let flatiron
after flatiron cool while she pored over the account in
                    finally she took off her spectacles and folded
the papers j
the papers carefully and laid them on the ironing board.
She was very happy.
    The young couple sailed the next day from New York
on the Teutonic, The crossing was so rough that only the
last two days was it possible to go out on deck. Ward was
sick and was taken care of by a sympathetic cockney
steward who spoke of Annabelle as the ^^Madam’^ and
thought she was his mother. Annabelle was a good sailor
but the baby made her feel miserable and whenever she
looked at herself in her handmirror she was so haggard
that she wouldn^t get out of her bunk. The stewardess
suggested gin with a dash of bitters in it and it helped her
over the last few days of the crossing. The night of the
captain’s dinner she finally appeared in the diningroom
in an evening gown of black Valenciennes and everybody
thought her the bestlooking woman on the boat. Ward
was in a fever for fear she’d drink too much champagne
as he had seen her put away four ponies of gin and bitters
and a Martini cocktail while dressing. He had made
friends with an elderly banker, Mr. Jarvis Oppenheimer
and his wife, and he was afraid that Annabelle would seem
a little fast to them. The captain’s dinner went off with-
out a hitch, however, and Annabelle and Ward found that
they made a good team. The captain, who had known Dn
 Strang, came and sat with them in the smokingroom
 afterwards and had a glass of champagne with them and
 with Mr. and Mrs. Oppenheimer and they heard people

 asking each other who could that charming scintillating

                                                                                195

213
brilliant young couple be, somebody interesting surely, and
when they went to bed after having seen the lighthouses
in the Irish Sea, they felt that all the seasick days had
been thoroughly worth while.
    Annabelle didn’t like it in London where the dark
streets were dismal in a continual drizzle of sleet, so they
only stayed a week at the Cecil before crossing to Pans.
Ward was sick again on the boat from Folkestone to
Boulogne and couldn’t keep track of Annabelle whom he
found in the dining saloon drinking brandy and soda with
an English army officer when the boat reached the calm
water between the long jetties of Boulogne harbor. It
Wasn’t so bad as he expected being in a country where he
didn’t know the language and Annabelle spoke French
yery adequately and they had a firstclass compartment and
a basket with a cold chicken and sandwiches in it and some
sweet wine that Ward drank for the first time—when in
Rome do as the Romans do—and they were quite the
honeymoon couple on the tram going down to Paris. They
drove in a cab from the station to the Hotel Wagram,
with only their handbaggage because the hotel porter took
care of the rest, through streets shimmering with green
gaslight on wet pavements. The horse’s hoofs rang sharp
on the asphalt and the rubbertired wheels of the cab spun
smoothly and the streets were crowded in spite of the fact
that it was a rainy winter night and there were people sit-
ting out at little marbletop tables round little stoves in
front of cafes and there were smells in the air of coffee
and wine and browning butter and baking bread. Anna-
belle’s eyes caught all the lights^ she looked very pretty,
kept nudging him to show him things and patting his
thigh with one hand. Annabelle had written to the hotel,
where she had stayed before with her father, and they
found a white bedroom and parlor waiting for them and
a roundfaced manager who was very elegant and very
iffable to bow them into it and a fire in the grate. They had

214
a bottle of champagne and some pate de fois gras before
going to bed and Ward felt like a king. She took off her
traveling clothes and put on a negligee and he put on a
smoking jacket that she had given him and that he hadn^t
worn and all his bitter feelings of the last month melted
away.
    They sat a long time looking into the fire smoking
Muratti cigarettes out of a tin box. She kept fondling his
hair and rubbing her hand round his shoulders and neck.
^WTy aren^t you more affectionate, Ward?” she said in
low gruff tones. ^T’m the sort of woman likes to be car-
ried off her feet .     .  . Take care ... You may lose me

.  . . Over here the men know how to make love to 3^
woman.”
    ^^Gimme a chance, won^t you? . .     . First thing Fm
going to get a job with some American firm or other. I
think Mr. OppenheimeFll help me do that. I’ll start in
taking French lessons right away. This’ll be a great op-
portunity for me.” ^Wou funny boy.” ^Wou don’t think
I’m going to run after you like a poodledog, do you, with-
out making any money of my own? . . . Nosiree, bobby.”
He got up and pulled her to her feet. ^^Let’s go to bed.”
    Ward went regularly to the Berlitz school for his
French lessons and went round to see Notre Dame and
Napoleon’s tomb and the Louvre with old Mr. Oppen-
heimer and his wife. Annabelle, who said that museums
gave her a headache, spent her days shopping and having
fittings with dressmakers. There were not many American
firms in Paris so the only job Ward could get, even with
the help of Mr. Oppenheimer who knew everyone, was
on Gordon Bennett’s newspaper, the Pans edition of The
          York Herald, The job consisted of keeping track of
arriving American business men, interviewing them on
 the beauties of Paris and on international relations. This
 was his meat and enabled him to make many valuable con-

 tacts. Annabelle thought it was all too boring and refused

                                                                                197

215
to be told anything about it. She made him put on a drest

suit every evening and take her to the opera and theatres.
This he was quite willing to do as it was good for his
French.
   She went to a very famous specialist for women^s dis-

eases who agreed that on no account should she have a
baby at this time. An immediate operation was necessary
and would be a little dangerous as the baby was so far
along. She didn^t tell Ward and only sent word from the
hospital when it was over. It was Christmas day. He went
immediately to see her. He heard the details m chilly
horror. He^d gotten used to the idea of having a baby
and thought it would have a steadying effect on Anna-
belle. She lay looking very pale in the bed in the private
sanatorium and he stood beside the bed with his fists
clenched without saying anything. At length the nurse
said to him that he was tiring madame and he went away.
When Annabelle came back from the hospital after four
or five days announcing gaily that she was fit as a fiddle
and was going to the south of France, he said nothing.
She got ready to go, taking it for granted that he was
coming, but the day she left on the train to Nice he told
her that he was going to stay on in Paris. She looked at
him sharply and then said with a laugh, “YouTe turning
me loose, are you?’^       have my business and you have
your pleasure,” he said. ^^All right, young man, it’s a go.”
He took her to the station and put her on the train, gave
the conductor five francs to take care of her and came
away from the station on foot. He’d had enough of the
smell of musk and perfume for a while.
    Paris was better than Wilmington but Ward didn’t like

it. So much leisure and the sight of so many people sitting
round eating and drinking got on his nerves. He felt very
 homesick the day the Ocean City booklet arrived inclosed
 with an enthusiastic letter from Colonel Wedgewood.
 Things were moving at last, the Colonel said, as for him-
         198

216
self he was putting every cent he could scrape up, beg of
borrow, into options. He even suggested that Ward send
him a little money to invest for him, now that he was in
a position to risk a stake on the surety of a big turnover 5
risk wasn’t the word because the whole situation was sewed
up in a bag, nothing to do but shake the tree and let the
fruit fall into their mouths. Ward went down the steps
from the ofEce of Morgan Harjes where he got his mail and
out onto Boulevard Haussmann. The heavy coated paper
felt good to his fingers. He put the letter in his pocket and
walked down the boulevard with the honk of horns and
the ring of horse’s hoofs and the shulfle of steps in his ears,
now and then reading a phrase. Why, it almost made him
want to go back to Ocean City (Maryland) himself. A
little ruddy sunlight was warming the winter gray of the
streets. A smell of roasting coffee came from somewhere;
Ward thought of the white crackling sunlight of wind
swept days at home; days that lashed you full of energy
and hope; the Strenuous Life. He had a date to lunch
with Mr. Oppenheimer at a very select little restaurant
down in the slums somewhere called the Tour d’Argent
When he got into a redwheeled taximeter cab it made him
feel good again that the driver understood his directions.
After all it was educational, made up for those years oi
college he had missed. He had read through the booklet
for the third time when he reached the restaurant.
    He got out at the restaurant and was just paying the
taxi when he saw Mr, Oppenheimer and another map
arriving down the quai on foot. Mr. Oppenheimer wore a
gray overcoat and a gray derby of the same pearly coloi:

as his moustaches; the other man was a steelgray indi-
vidual with a thin nose and chin. When he saw them
Ward decided that he must be more careful about his

clothes in the future.
    They ate lunch for a long time and a great many
courses, although the steelgray man, whose name was
                                                                               m

217
McGill—he was manager of one of Jones and Laughlin’s

steel plants in Pittsburgh—said his stomach wouldn’t

stand anything but a chop and a baked potato and drank
whisky and soda instead of wine. Mr. Oppenheimer en-

joyed his food enormously and kept having long consul-

tations about it with the head waiter. “Gentlemen, you
must indulge me a little . . . this for me is a debauch,”
he said. “Then, not being under the watchful eye of my
wife, I can take certain liberties with my digestion        . .   .
My wife has entered the sacred precincts of a fitting at her

corsetiere’s and is not to be disturbed ... You, Ward,
are not old enough to realize the possibilities of food.”
Ward looked embarrassed and boyish and said he was
enjoying the duck very much. “Food,” went on Mr. Op-
penheimer, “is the last pleasure of an old man.”
   When they were sitting over Napoleon brandy in big
bowlshaped glasses and cigars, Ward got up his nerve to
bring out the Ocean City (Maryland) booklet that had
been burning a hole in his pocket all through lunch. He
laid it on the table modestly. “I thought maybe you might
like to glance at it, Mr. Oppenheimer, as ... as some-
thing a bit novel in the advertising line.” Mr. Oppen-
heimer took out his glasses and adjusted them on his nose,
took a sip of brandy and looked through the book with a
bland smile. He closed it, let a little curling blue cigar-
smoke out through his nostrils and said, “Why, Ocean
City must be an earthly paradise indeed . .     . Don’t you
lay it on ... er ... a bit thick'”’ “But you see, sir,
we’ve got to make the man on the street just crazy to go
there .   . . There’s got to be a word to catch your eye the
minute you pick it up.”
    Mr. McGill, who up to that time hadn’t looked at
Ward, turned a pair of hawkgray eyes on him in a hard
stare. With a heavy red hand he reached for the booklet.
He read it intently right through while Mr. Oppenheimer
 went on to talk about the bouquet of the brandy and how

218
you should warm the glass a little In your hand and take
It in tiny sips, rather inhaling It than drinking it. Sud^
denly Mr. McGill brought his fist down on the table and
laughed a dry quick laugh that didn’t move a muscle of
his face. “By gorry, that’ll get ’em, too,” he said. “I reckon
It was Mark Twain said there was a sucker born every
minute  .  . .” He turned to Ward and said, “I’m sorry I
                                                            do you mind repeat-
didn’t ketch your name, young feller j
                                                                                   Ward
ing it?” “With pleasure . . . It’s Moorehouse, J.
Moorehouse.” “Where do you work?” “I’m on The Paris
Herald for the time being,” said Ward, blushing. “Where
do you live when you’re in the States?” “My home’s in
Wilmington, Delaware, but I don’t guess I’ll go back
there when we go home. I’ve been offered some editorial
work on The Public Ledger in Philly.” Mr. McGill took
out a visiting card and wrote an address on it. “Well, if
you ever think of coming to Pittsburgh, look me up.” “I’d
be delighted to see you.”
    “His wife,” put in Mr. Oppenheimer, “is the daughter
of Dr. Strang, the Philadelphia nose and throat specialist
... By the way, Ward, how Is the dear girl? I hope
Nice has cured her of her tonsilitis,” “Yes, sir,” said
Ward, “she writes that she’s much better.” “She’s a lovely
creature . .    . charming   . . .” said Mr. Oppenheimer,
draining the last sip out of his brandyglass with upcast

eyes.
    Next day Ward got a wire from Annabelle that she was
coming up to Paris. He met her at the train. She intro-
duced a tall Frenchman with a black Vandyke beard, who
was helping her off with her bags when Ward came up,

as “Monsieur Forelle, my traveling companion.” They
 didn’t get a chance to talk until they got into the cab

 together. The cab smelt musty as they had to keep the
windows closed on account of the driving rain. “Well, my
 dear,” Annabelle said, “have you got over the pet you
were in when I left? ... I hope you have because I have

                                                                               201

219
bad news for you.” ^^What^s the trouble?” “Dad^s gotten

himself in a mess financially ... I knew it^d happen.
He has no more idea of business than a cat .      .  . Well,

that fine Ocean City boom of yours collapsed before it had

started and Dad got scared and tried to unload his sand-

lots and naturally nobody’d buy them   . .  . Then the Im-
provement and Realty Company went bankrupt and that

precious Colonel of yours has disappeared and Dad has
got himself somehow personally liable for a lot of the
concern^s debts. . . . And there you are. I wired him we
were coming home as soon as we could get a sailing. Pll
have to see what I can do   .  .  . He^s helpless as a child
about business,”
   ^^That won^t make me mad. I wouldn^t have come over
here anyway if it wasn^t for you.”

    ^^Just all selfsacrifice, aren’t you?”
    “Let’s not squabble, Annabelle.”
   The last days in Pans Ward began to like it. They
heard La Boheme at the opera and were both very
much excited about it. Afterwards they went to a cafe and
had some cold partridge and wine and Ward told Anna-
belle about how he’d wanted to be a songwriter and about
Marie O’Higgins and how he’d started to compose a song
about her and they felt very fond of each other. He kissed
her again and again in the cab going home and the ele-
vator going up to their room seemed terribly slow.
    They still had a thousand dollars on the letter of credit
Dr. Strang had given them as a wedding present, so that
Annabelle bought all sorts of clothes and hats and per-
fumes and Ward went to an English tailor near the
Church of the Madeleine and had four suits made. The
last day Ward bought her a brooch in the shape of a
rooster, made of Limoges enamel and set with garnets,
out of his salary from The Bans Herald. Eating lunch
after their baggage had gone to the boat train they felt
very tender about Paris and each other and the brooch.
         202

220
They sailed from Havre on the Tourame and had a com-
pletely calm passage, a gray glassy swell all the way,
although the month was February. Ward wasn’t seasick.
He walked round and round the firstclass every morning
before Annabelle got up. He wore a Scotch tweed cap and
a Scotch tweed overcoat to match, with a pair of field-
glasses slung over his shoulder, and tried to puzzle out
some plan for the future. Wilmington anyway was far
behind like a ship hull down on the horizon.
    The steamer with tugboats chugging at its sides nosed
its way through the barges and tugs and carferries and
red whistling ferryboats of New York harbor against a
howling icybright northwest wind.
    Annabelle was grouchy and said it looked horrid, but
Ward felt himself full of enthusiasm when a Jewish gen-
tleman in a checked cap pointed out the Battery, the Cus-
tom House, the Aquarium and Trinity Church.
    They drove right from the dock to the ferry and at§
in the redcarpeted diningroom at the Pennsylvania Sta-
tion in Jersey City. Ward had fried oysters. The friendly
darkey waiter in a white coat was like home. ^^Home to
God’s country,” Ward said, and decided he’d have to go
down to Wilmington and say hello to the folks. Annabelle
laughed at him and they sat stiffly in the parlorcar of the
Philadelphia train without speaking.
    Dr. Strang’s affairs were in very bad shape and, as he
was busy all day with his practice, Annabelle took them
over completely. Her skill in handling finance surprised
both Ward and her father. They lived in Dr. Strang’s big
old house on Spruce Street. Ward, through a friend of Dr.

Strang’s, got a job on The ’Public Ledger and was rarely
 home. When he had any spare time he listened to lectures
 on economics and business at the Drexel Institute. Eve-
nings Annabelle took to going out with a young architect
 named Joachim Beale who was very rich and owned an
automobile. Beale was a thin young man with a taste fof

                                                                               203

221
majolica and Bourbon whisky and he called Annabellci

^hiiy Cleopatrad^
   Ward came in one night and found them both drunk

sitting with very few clothes on in Annabelle^s den in the
top of the house. Dr. Strang had gone to a medical con-

ference in Kansas City. Ward stood in the doorway with

his arms folded and announced that he was through and
would sue for divorce and left the house slamming the
door behind him and went to the Y.M.C.A. for the night.
Next afternoon when he got to the ofEce he found a spe-

cial delivery letter from Annabelle begging him to be
careful what he did as any publicity would be disastrous
to her father’s practice, and offering to do anything he
suggested. He immediately answered it:

Dear Annabelle:
    I now realize that you have intended all along to use
me only as a screen for your disgraceful and unwomanly
conduct. I now understand why you prefer the company
of foreigners, bohemians and such to that of ambitious
young Americans.
    I have no desire to cause you or your father any pain
or publicity, but in the first place you must refrain from
degrading the name of Moorehouse while you still legally
bear it and also I shall feel that when the divorce is sat-
isfactorily arranged I shall be entitled to some compen-
sation for the loss of time, etc., and the injury to my career
v'hat has come through your fault, I am leaving tomorrow
for Pittsburgh where I have a position awaiting me and
work that I hope will cause me to forget you and the great
pain your faithlessness has caused me.

He wondered for a while how to end the letter, and finally
wrote                                                        .        1 WM.
                                                                sincerely J
^d mailed it.
    He lay awake all night in the upper berth in the sleepei
         o.nA

222
for Pittsburgh. Here he was twentythree years old and K
hadn’t a college degree and he didn’t know any trade ana
he’d given up the hope o£ being a songwriter. God damn
it, he’d never be valet to any society dame again. The
sleeper was stuffy, the pillow kept getting in a knot under
his ear, snatches of the sales talk for Bancroft’s or Bryant’s
histories, .   .  . ^^Through peachorchards to the sea . .
Mr. Hiliyard’s voice addressing the jury from the depths
of the realestate office in Wilmington; ^^Realestate, sir is
the one safe sure steady conservative investment, imper-
                                                       the owner of realestate
vious to loss by flood and fire 5
links himself by indissoluble bonds to the growth of his
city or nation .    . . improve or not at his leisure and con-
venience and sit at home in quiet and assurance letting the
riches drop in to his lap that are produced by the unavoid-
able and inalienable growth in wealth of a mighty na-
tion . .        ^^For a young man with proper connections and
if I may say so pleasing manners and a sound classical
education,” Mr. Oppenheimer had said, “banking should
offer a valuable field for the cultivation of the virtues of
energy, diplomacy and perhaps industry. ...” A hand
was tugging at his bedclothes.
    “Pittsburgh, sah, in fortyfive minutes,” came the colored
porter’s voice. Ward pulled on his trousers, noticed with
dismay that they were losing their crease, dropped from
the berth, stuck his feet in his shoes that were sticky from
being hastily polished with inferior polish, and stumbled
along the aisle past dishevelled people emerging from
their bunks, to the men’s washroom. His eyes were glued
together and he wanted a bath. The car was unbearably

stuffy and the washroom smelt of underwear and of other
 men’s shaving soap. Through the window he could see

black hills powdered with snow, an occasional coaltipple,
rows of gray shacks all alike, a riverbed scarred with
minedumps and slagheaps, purple lacing of trees along the

 hill’s edge cut sharp against a red sunj then against th^'

                                                                               205

223
hill, bright and red as the sun, a blob of flame from a

smelter. Ward shaved, cleaned his teeth, washed his face
and neck as best he could, parted his hair. His jaw and
cheekbones were getting a square look that he admired.
^^Cleancut young executive,” he said to himself as he fas-
tened his collar and tied his necktie. It was Annabelle had
taught him the trick of wearing a necktie the same color

as his eyes. As he thought of her name a faint tactile
memory of her lips troubled him, of the musky perfume
she used. He brushed the thought aside, started to
whistle, stopped for fear the other men dressing might
think it peculiar and went and stood on the platform. The
sun was well up now, the hills were pink and black and
the hollows blue where the smoke of breakfastfires col-
lected. Everything was shacks in rows, ironworks, coal-
tipples. Now and then a hill threw a row of shacks or a
group of furnaces up against the sky. Stragglings of dark-
faced men in dark clothes stood In the slush at the cross-
ings. Coalgrimed walls shut out the sky. The train passed
through tunnels under crisscrossed bridges, through deep
cuttings. ^Tittsburgh Union Station,” yelled the porter.
Ward put a quarter into the colored man’s hand, picked
out his bag from a lot of other bags, and walked with a
brisk firm step down the platform, breathing deep the
cold coalsmoky air of the trainshed.



                            THE CAMERA EYE (17)


        the spring you could see Halley’s Comet over the

elms from the back topfloor windows of the Upper House
Mr. Greenleaf said you would have to go to confirmation

class and be confirmed when the bishop came and next

         206

224
time you went canoeing you told Skinny that you v/ouldn^!*

be confirmed because you believed in camping and canoe

ing and Halley’s Comet and the Universe and the souncj

the rain made on the tent the night you’d both read The
Hound of the Baskervdles and you’d hung out the steak

on a tree and a hound must have smelt it because he kept

circling round you and howling something terrible and

you were so scared (but you didn’t say that, you don’t

know what you said)

        and not in church and Skinny said if you’d never

been baptized you couldn’t be confirmed and you went

and told Mr. Greenleaf and he looked very chilly and

said you’d better not go to confirmation class any more

and after that you had to go to church Sundays but you

could go to either one you liked so sometimes you w^-nl

to the Congregational and sometimes to the Episcopalian

and the Sunday the bishop came you couldn’t see Halley’s

Comet any more and you saw the others being confirmed

and it lasted for hours because there were a lot of little

girls being confirmed too and all you could hear was

mumble mumble this thy child mumble mumble this thy

child and you wondered if you’d be alive next time H!al*

 ley’s Comet came round







                                                                               207

225
                                                      NEWSREEL XIII



        I was in front of the national palace when the firing

began. I ran across the Plaza with other thousands of scurry-

t\ip: men women and children scores of whom fell in their

^.hght to cover
                        NEW HIGH MOUNTAINS FOUND

        Oh Jtm O^Shea was cast away ufon an Indian Isle

        'The natives there they liked his hair
        They liked his Irish smile

                              BEDLAM IN ART

                          BANDITS AT HOME IN WILDS

        Washington considers unfortunate illogical and unnatural
the selection of General Huerta as provisional president of
Mexico in succession to the overthrown president

                        3 FLEE CITY FEAR WEB

        He’d put sand in the Hotel sugar writer says he came to
America an exile and found only sordidness.
        LUNG YU FORMER EMPRESS OF CHINA DIES IN TKB
FORBIDDEN CITY

                             La cucaracha la cucaracha
                              Ya no quiere caminar
                             Torque no tiene
                                           forque no tiene
                             Marijuana que jumar.

        Ignoring of lower classes in organizing of republic maj
cause another uprising

                 600 AMERICANS FLEE CAPITAL
         You shall have rings on your fingers
        And bells on your toes
        Elefhants to ride ufon
         208

226
        My little Irish rose
            come to your nabob and on next St, Patrick's day
        Be Mrs, Mumbo Jumbo Jijibhoy Jay O^Shea



                                ELEANOR STODDARD


    When she was small she hated everythingo She hated
her father^ a stout redhaired man smelling of whiskers
and stale pipetobacco. He worked in an ofBce in the stock-
yards and came home with the stockyards stench on his
clothes and told bloody jokes about butchering sheep and
steers and hogs and men. Eleanor hated smells and the
sight of blood. Nights she used to dream she lived alone
with her mother in a big clean white house in Oak Park
in winter when there was snow on the ground and she^d
been setting a white linen tablecloth with bright white
silver and she’d set white flowers and the white meat of
chicken before her mother who was a society lady in a
dress of white samite, but there’d suddenly be a tiny red
speck on the table and it would grow and grow and her
mother would make helpless fluttering motions with her
hands and she’d try to brush it off but it would grow a
spot of blood welling into a bloody blot spreading over
the tablecloth and she’d wake up out of the nightmare
smelling the stockyards and screaming.
   When she was sixteen in highschool she and a girl
named Isabelle swore together that if a boy ever touched
them they’d kill themselves. But that fall the girl got
pneumonia after scarlet fever and died.
    The only other person Eleanor liked was Miss Oli-
phant, her English teacher. Miss Oliphant had been born
in England. Her parents had come to Chicago when she
was a girl in her teens. She was a great enthusiast for the
                                                                              200

227
English language, tried to get her pupils to use the broad

‘V’ and felt that she had a right to some authority in

matters pertaining to English literature due to being dis-

tantly related to a certain Mrs. Oliphant who’d been an
English literary lady in the middle nineteenth century
and had written so beautifully about Florence. So she’d

occasionally have her more promising pupils, those who
seemed the children of nicer parents, to tea in her little

flat where she lived all alone with a sleepy blue Persian

cat and a bullfinch, and talk to them about Goldsmith
and Dr. Johnson’s pithy sayings and Keats and cor cordtum
and how terrible it was he died so young and Tennyson
and how rude he’d been to women and about how they
changed the guard at Whitehall and the grapevine Henry
the Eighth planted at Hampton Court and the illfated
Mary Queen of Scots. Miss Oliphant’s parents had been
Catholics and had considered the Stuarts the rightfuf heirs
to the British throne, and used to pass their wineglasses
over the waterpitcher when they drank to the king. All
this thrilled the boys and girls very much and particularly
Eleanor and Isabelle, and Miss Oliphant used to give
them high grades for their compositions and encourage
them to read. Eleanor was very fond of her and very at-
tentive in class. Just to hear Miss Oliphant pronounce a
phrase like ^^The Great Monuments of English Prose,”
or ^^The Little Princes in the Tower” or ^^St. George and
Merrie England” made small chills go up and down her
spine. When Isabelle died, Miss Oliphant was so lovely
about it, had her to tea with her all alone and read her
^^Lycidas” in a clear crisp voice and told her to read
^^Adonais” when she got home, but that she couldn’t read
it to her because she knew she’d break down if she did.
Then she talked about her best friend when she’d been a
girl who’d been an Irish girl with red hair and a clear
warm white skin like Crown Darby, my dear, and how.
she’d gone to India and died of the fever, and how Miss
        210

228
Oliphant had never thought to survive her grief and
how Crown Darby had been Invented and the Inventor
had spent his last penny working on the formula for this
wonderful china and had needed some gold as the last
Ingredient, and they had been starving to death and there
had been nothing left but his wife^s wedding ring and how
they kept the fire In the furnace going with their chairs
and tables and at least he had produced this wonderful
china that the royal family used exclusively.
    It was Miss Oliphant who induced Eleanor to take
courses at the Art Institute. She had reproductions on her
walls of pictures by Rossetti and Burne-Jones and talked
to Eleanor about the pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood. She
made her feel that Art was something ivory white and
very pure and noble and distant and sad.
    When her mother died of pernicious anaemia Eleanor
was a thin girl of eighteen, working days in a laceshop
in the Loop and studying commercial art evenings at the
Art Institute. After the funeral she went home and packed
her belongings and moved to Moody House. She hardly
ever went to see her father. He sometimes called her up
on the phone but whenever she could she avoided answer -

ing. She wanted to forget all about him.
    In the laceshop they liked her because she was so re-
fined and gave the place what old Mrs. Lang who owned
the store called ^^an Indefinable air of chic,” but they only
paid her ten dollars a week and five of that went for rent
and board. She didn’t eat much, but the food was so bad
In the dining hall and she hated sitting with the other

girls so that sometimes she had to get an extra bottle of
milk to drink in her room and some weeks she’d find her-

self without money to buy pencils and drawingpaper with
and would have to go by to see her father and get a couple
of dollars from him. He gave it to her gladly enough, but
somehow that made her hate him more than ever.
    Evenings she used to sit in her little sordid cubbyhole
                                                                               2II

229
Df a room with its ugly bedspread and ugly iron bed, while

i sound of hymnsinging came up from the common hall,

reading Ruskin and Pater out of the public library. Some-
times she would let the book drop on her knees and sit all
evening staring at the dim reddish electriclight bulb that

wai5 ail the management allowed.
    Whenever she asked for a raise Mrs. Lang said, ^Why,
you’ll be marrying soon and leaving me, dear; a girl with
your style, indefinable chic can’t stay single long, and
then you won’t need it.”
   Sundays she usually took the train out to Pullman
where her mother’s sister had a little house. Aunt Betty
was a quiet housewifely little woman who laid all Elea-
nor’s peculiarities to girlish fancies and kept a bright look-
out for a suitable young man she could corral as a beau
for her. Her husband, Uncle Joe, was foreman in a roll-
ing mill. Many years in the rolling mill had made him
completely deaf, but he claimed that actually in the mill
he could hear what was said perfectly. If it was summer
he spent Sunday hoeing his gardenpatch where he spe-
cialized in lettuce and asters. In winter or in bad weather
he’d be sitting in the front room reading The Rdlroad
Man^s Magazine, Aunt Betty would cook an elaborate
dinner from recipes out of The Ladtes^ Home Journal
and they’d ask Eleanor to arrange the flowers for them
on the dinnertable. After dinner Aunt Betty would wash
ihe dishes and Eleanor would wipe them, and while the
old people took their nap she would sit in the front room
reading the society section of The Chicago Tribune, After
supper if it was fine the old people would walk down to
the station with her and put her on the train, and Aunt
Betty would say that it was a shocking shame for a lovely
girl like her to be living all alone in the big city. Eleanor
would smile a bright bitter smile and say that she wasn’t
afraid.
    The cars going home would be crowded Sunday nights

230
with young men and girls sticky and mussed up and sun-
burned from an outing in the country or on the dunes.
Eleanor hated them and the Italian families with squall-
ing brats that filled the air with a reek of wine and garlic
and the Germans redfaced from a long afternoon’s beer-
drinking and the drunk Finn and Swedish workmen who
stared at her with a blue alcoholic gleam out of wooden
faces. Sometimes a man would try to start something and
she’d have to move into another car.
    Once, when the car was very crowded a curlyhaired
man rubbed himself up against her suggestively. The
crowd was so thick she couldn’t pull herself away from
him. She could hardly keep from screaming out for help j

it was only that she felt it was so vulgar to make a fuss.
Uncontrollable dizziness came over her when she finally
forced her tvay out at her station, and she had to stop at

a drugstore on the way home for a little aromatic spirits

of ammonia. She rushed through the hall of Moody
 House and up to her room still trembling. She was nau-

 seated and one of the other girls found her being sick in

 the bathroom and looked at her so queerly. She was very
 unhappy at times like that and thought of suicide. She had

 painfol cramps during her monthly periods and used to

 have to stay in bed at least one day every month. Often

 she felt miserable for a whole week.
     One Fall day she had phoned Mrs. Lang that she was

 sick and would have to stay in bed. She went back up to

 her room and lay down on the bed and read Romola.

 She was reading through the complete works of George

 Eliot that were in the Moody House library. When the

 old scrubwoman opened the door to make the bed she said,

 "Sick ... I’ll clean up, Mrs. Koontz.” In the afternoon

 she got hungry and the sheets were all ruraply under her

 back and although she felt rather ashamed of herself for

 feeling able to go out when she’d told Mrs. Lang she was

 too sick to move she suddenly felt she would suffocate if

                                                                                213

231
she stayed in her room another minute. She dressed care-

fully and went downstairs feeling a little furtive.

you’re not so sick after all,” said Mrs. Biggs, the matron,
when she passed her in the hall.        just felt I needed a
breath of air.” ^^Too bad about you,” she heard Mrs. Biggs
say under her breath as she went out the door. Mrs. Biggs
was very suspicious of Eleanor because she was an art stu-

dent.
    Feeling a little faint she stopped at a drugstore and had
some aromatic spirits of ammonia in water. Then she took
a car down to Grant Park. A tremendous northwest wind
was blowing grit and papers in whirls along the lakefront.
   She went into the Art Institute and up into the Stickney
Room to see the Whistlers. She liked the Art Institute
better than anything else in Chicago, better than anything
else in the world, the quiet, the absence of annoying men,
the smooth smell of varnish from the paintings. Except
on Sundays when the crowd came and it was horrid.
Today there was no one in the Stickney Room but another
girl welldressed in a gray fox neckpiece and a little gray
hat with a feather in it. The other girl was looking fixedly
at the portrait of Manet. Eleanor was interested, she
rather pretended to look at the Whistlers than look at
them. Whenever she could she looked at the other girl.
She found herself standing beside the other girl also look-
ing at the portrait of Manet. Suddenly their eyes met. The
other girl had palebrown almondshaped eyes rather far
apart. think he’s the best painter in the world,” she said
combatively as if she wanted somebody to deny it.    think
he’s a lovely painter,” said Eleanor, trying to keep her
voice from trembling.        love that picture.” “You know
that’s not by Manet himself, that’s by Fantin-Latour,”
said the other girl. “Oh, yes, of course,” said Eleanor.
   There was a pause. Eleanor was afraid that would be
all, but the other girl said, “What other pictures do you
                                                                              then she
Hke?” Eleanor looked carefully at the Whistler j
        214

232
said slowly,       like Whistler and Corot.” “I do, too, but
I like Mdlet best. He’s so round and warm .          ,  . Have
you ever been to Barbizon?” ^^No, but I’d love to.” There
was a pause. ^^But I think Millet’s a little coarse, don’t
you?” Eleanor ventured. ^^You mean that chromo of the
Angelus? Yes, I simply loathe and despise religious feel-
ing in a picture, don’t you?” Eleanor didn’t quite know
what to say to that, so she shook her head and said, love
                      when I’ve been looking at them I can look
Whistler so 5
out of the window and everything looks, you know,
pastelly like that.”
         have an idea,” said the other girl who had been look-
ing at a little watch she had in her handbag.      don’t have
to be home till six. Why don’t you come and have tea
with me? I know a little place where you can get very
good tea, a German pastry shop. I don’t have to be home
till six and we can have a nice long chat. You won’t think

It’s unconventional of me asking you, will you? I like un-
conventionality, don’t you? Don’t you hate Chicago?”
    Yes, Eleanor did hate Chicago and conventional people
and all that. They went to the pastryshop and drank tea
and the girl in gray, whose name was Eveline Hutchins,
took hers with lemon in it. Eleanor talked a great deal
and made the other girl laugh. Her father, Eleanor found
herself explaining, was a painter who lived in Florence
and whom she hadn’t seen since she was a little girl. There
had been a divorce and her mother had married again, a
business man connected with Armour and Company, and
now her mother was dead and she had only some relative‘<
                            she studied at the Art Institute but wav
at Lake Forest 5
thinking of giving it up because the teachers didn’t suit

her. She thought living in Chicago was just too horrible
and wanted to go East. “Why don’t you go to Florence
and live with your father?” asked Eveline Hutchins.
    “Well, I might some day, when my ship comes in,” said
Eleanor,
                                                                               2IJ

233
             well, ril never be rich,’" said Eveline. “My fa-

therms a clergyman . . . Let’s go to Florence together^

Eleanor, and call on your father. If we arrived there he
couldn’t very well throw us out.”
    “I’d love to take a trip some day.”
    “It’s time I was home. By the way, where do you live?

Let’s meet tomorrow afternoon and look at all the pic-

tures together.”
    “I’m afraid I’ll be busy tomorrow.”
    “Well, maybe you can come to supper some night. I’ll

isk mother when I can have you. It’s so rare to meet a

girl you can talk to. We live on Drexel Boulevard. Here’s
my card. I’ll send you a postcard and you’ll promise to
come, won’t you?”
    “I’d love to, if it’s not earlier than seven ... You sec

I have an occupation that keeps me busy every afternoon
except Sunday, and Sundays I usually go out to see my
relatives in . .
    “In Lake Forest?”
    “Yes . . . When I’m in town I live at a sort of
Y.W.C.A. place, Moody Houses it’s plebeian but con-
venient .   .  . I’ll write down the address on this card.”
The card was of Mrs. Lang’s, “Imported Laces and
Hand-Embroidered Fabrics.” She wrote her address on
It, scratched out the other side and handed it to Eveline.
“That’s lovely,” she said, “I’ll drop you a card this very
night and you’ll promise to come, won’t you?”
    Eleanor saw her onto the streetcar and started to walk
slowly along the street. She had forgotten all about feel-
ing sick, but now that the other girl had gone she felt let
down and shabbily dressed and lonely picking her way
through the windy evening bustle of the streets.
    Eleanor made several friends through Eveline Hutchins.
The first time she went to the Hutchinses she was too
 awed to notice much, but later she felt freer with them,
particularly as she discovered that they all thought her an

234
interesting girl and very refined. There were Dr. and
Mrs. Hutchins and two daughters and a son away at col-
lege. Dr. Hutchins was a Unitarian minister and very
broadminded and Mrs. Hutchins did watercolors of flowers
that were declared to show great talent. The elder
daughter, Grace, had been at school in the East, at Vassar,
and was thought to have shown ability in a literary way,
the son was taking postgraduate Greek at Harvard and
Eveline was taking the most interesting courses right there

at Northwestern. Dr. Hutchins was a softvoiced man with

a large smooth pinkish face and large smooth white dead-
 looking hands. The Hutchinses were all planning to go
abroad next year which would be Dr. Hutchins’ sabbatical.
 Eleanor had never heard talk like that before and it

 thrilled her.
     Then one evening Eveline took her to Mrs. Shuster’s.
 “You mustn’t say anything about Mrs. Shuster at home,

 will you?” said Eveline as they were coming down from

 the Elevated. “Mr. Shuster is an art dealer and my father
 fhinks they’re a little too Bohemian . . . It’s just because
 Annie Shuster came to our house one night and smoked

 all through dinner. ... I said we’d go to the concert at

 the Auditorium.”
     Eleanor had made herself a new dress, a very simple

 white dress, with a little green on it, not exactly an eve-

 ning dress, but one she could wear any time, for the occa-

 sion, and when Annie Shuster, a dumpy little redhaired
 woman with a bouncy manner of walking and talking

 helped them off with their wraps in the hall she exclaimed
 how pretty it was. “Why, yes, it’s lovely,” said Eveline.

 “In fact, you’re looking pretty as a peach tonight,

 Eleanor.” “I bet that dress wasn’t made in this town . . .

 Looks like Paris to me,” said Mrs. Shuster. Eleanor

 smiled deprecatingly and blushed a little and looked hand-

 somer than ever.
     There were a great many people packed into two small

                                                                                21*7

235
rooms and cigarette smoke and coffeecups and smell of
some kind of punch. Mr. Shuster was a whitehaired gray-
faced man with a head too large for his body and a tired
manner. He talked like an Englishman. There were sev-

eral young men standing round him^ one of them Eleanor
had known casually when she had studied at the Art Insti-

tute. His name was Eric Egstrom and she had always
liked himj he was tow-haired and blue-eyed and had a

little blond mustache. She could see that Mr. Shuster
thought a lot of him. Eveline took her around and intro-
duced her to everybody and asked everybody questions
that seemed sometimes disconcerting. Men and women
both smoked and talked about books and pictures and
about people Eleanor had never heard of. She looked
around and didn^t say much and noticed the Greek sil-
houettes on the orange lampshades and the pictures on the
walls which looked very odd indeed and the two rows of
yellowhacked French books on the shelves and felt that
she might learn a great deal there.
    They went away early because Eveline had to go by the
Auditorium to see what the program at the concert was
for fear she might be asked about it, and Eric and another
young man took them home. After they’d left Eveline at
her house they asked Eleanor where she lived and she
hated to say Moody House because it was in such a horrid-
looking street, so she made them walk with her to an Ele-
vated station and ran up the steps quickly and wouldn’t
let them come with her, although it scared her to go home
alone as late as it was.
    Many of Mrs. Lang’s customers thought Eleanor was
French, on account of her dark hair, her thin oval face
and her transparent skin. In fact, one day when a Mrs.
McCormick that Mrs. Lang suspected might be one of
^^the” McCormicks asked after that lovely French girl who
waited on her before, Mrs. Lang got an idea. Eleanor
                                                                so she bought her
would have to be French from now on 3
         218

236
twenty tickets at the Berlitz School and said she could
have the hour off in the morning between nine and ten if
she would go and take French lessons there. So all
through December and January Eleanor studied French
three times a week with an old man in a smelly alpaca
jacket and began to slip a phrase in now and then as un-
concernedly as she could when she was talking to the
customers^ and when there was anybody in the shop Mrs,
Lang always called her ^^Mademoiselle.”
    She worked hard and borrowed yellowbacked books
from the Shusters to read in the evenings with a dic-
tionary and soon she knew more French than Eveline did
who had had a French governess when she was little. One
day at the Berlitz School she found she had a new teacher.
The old man had pneumonia and she had a young French-
man instead. He was a thin young man with a sharp blue-
shaved chin and large brown eyes with long lashes.
Eleanor liked him at once, his thin aristocratic hands and
his aloof manner. After half an hour they had forgotten
all about the lesson and were talking English. He spoke
English with a funny accent but fluently. She particularly
liked the throaty way he pronounced “r.”
    Next time she was all tingling going up the stairs to
see if it would be the same young man. It was. He told
her that the old man had died. She felt she ought to be
sorry but she wasn’t. The young man noticed how she

felt and screwed his face up into a funny half laughing,
half crying expression and said, ^^Vae victis,” Then he told
her about his home in France and how he hated the con-
ventional bourgeois life there and how he’d come to
America because it was the land of youth and the future
and skyscrapers and the Twentieth Century Limited and
how beautiful he thought Chicago was. Eleanor had never
heard anyone talk like that and told him he must have
gone through Ireland and kissed the blarney stone. Then
he looked very aggrieved and said, ^^Mademoiselle, e’est

                                                                               ai9

237
ia pure verite,” and she said she believed him absolutely
and how interesting it was to meet him and how she must
introduce him to her friend Eveline Hutchins. Then he
went on to tell her how he’d lived in New Orleans and
how he’d come as a steward on a French Line boat and
how he’d worked as dishwasher and busboy and played
the piano in cabarets and worse places than that and how
much he loved Negroes and how he was a painter and
wanted so much to get a studio and paint but that he
hadn’t the money yet. Eleanor was a little chilled by the
part about dishwashing and cabarets and colored people,
but when he said he was interested in art she felt she
really would have to introduce him to Eveline and she

felt very bold and unconventional when she asked him to
meet them at the Art Institute Sunday afternoon. After
all if they decided against it they wouldn’t have to go.
    Eveline was thrilled to death but they got Eric
Egstrom to come along too, on account of Frenchmen
having such a bad reputation. The Frenchman was very
late and they began to be afraid he wasn’t coming or that
they’d missed him in the crowd but at last Eleanor saw
him coming up the big staircase. His name was Maurice
Millet—no, no relation of the painter’s—^and he shocked
them all very much by refusing to look at any paintings
in the Art Institute and saying that he thought it ought
to be burned down and used a lot of words like cubism
and futurism that Eleanor had never heard before. But
she could see at once that he had made a great hit with
Eveline and Eric; in fact, they hung on his every word
and all through tea neither of them paid any attention
to Eleanor. Eveline invited Maurice to the house and
they all went to supper to Drexel Boulevard where
Maurice was very polite to Dr. and Mrs. Hutchins, and
on to the Shusters afterwards. They left the Shusters to-
gether and Maurice said that the Shusters were impossible
 ind had very bad paintings on their walls, “Tout ga c’est

238
affreusement pompier^” he said. Eleanor was puzzled
but Eveline and Erie said that they understood perfectly
that he meant they knew as little about art as a firemen’s
convention, and they laughed a great deal.
   The next time she saw Eveline, Eveline confessed that
she was madly in love with Maurice and they both cried
a good deal and decided that after all their beautifuj
friendship could stand even that. It was up in Eveline’s
room at Drexel Boulex^ard. On the mantel was a por-
trait Eveline was trying to do of him in pastels from
memory. They sat side by side on the bed, very close, with
their arms round each other and talked solemnly about
each other and Eleanor told about how she felt about
menj Eveline didn’t feel quite that way but nothing could
ever break up their beautiful friendship and they’d al-
ways tell each other everything
    About that time Eric Egstrom got a job in the interiol
decorating department at Marshall Field’s that paid him
€fty a week. He got a fine studio with a northlight in an
alley off North Clark Street and Maurice went to live with
him there. The girls were there a great deal and they
had many friends in and tea in glasses Russian style and
sometimes a little Virginia Dare wine, so they didn’t
have to go to the Shusters any more. Eleanor was always
                                                                         and the fact
trying to get in a word alone with Eveline 5
that Maurice didn’t like Eveline the way Eveline liked
him made Eveline very unhappy, but Maurice and Eric
seemed to be thoroughly happy. They slept in the same
bed and were always together. Eleanor used to wonder
about them sometimes but it was so nice to know boys
who weren’t horrid about women. They all went to the
opera together and to concerts and art exhibitions—it was
Eveline or Eric who usually bought the tickets and paid
when they ate in restaurants—^and Eleanor had a better
time those few months than she’d ever had in her life
before. She never went out to Pullman any more and she
                                                                               22X

239
and Eveline talked about getting a studio together when
the Hrtchinser came back from their trip abroad. The
thought that every day brought June nearer and that
then she would lose Eveline and have to face the horrid

gritr/ dusty sweaty Chicago Summer alone made Eleanor
a little miserable sometimes, but Eric was trying to get
her a job in his department at Marshall Field^s, and she
and Eveline were following a course of lectures on in-

terior decorating at the University evenings, and that
gave her something to look forward to.
    Maurice painted the loveliest pictures in pale buffs and

V'lolets of longfaced boys with big luminous eyes and long
lashes, and longfaced girls that looked like boys, and
Russian wolfhounds with big luminous eyes, and always
in the back there were a few girders or a white skyscraper
and a big puff of white clouds and Eveline and Eleanor
thought it was such a shame that he had to go on teaching

it the Berlitz School.
   The day before Eveline sailed for Europe they had
V little party at Egstrom’s place. Maurice’s pictures were
around the walls and they were all glad and sorry and
excited and tittered a great deal. Then Egstrom came in
with the news that he had told his boss about Eleanor
and how she knew French and had studied art and was so
goodlooking and everything and Mr. Spotmann had said

to bring her around at noon tomorrow, and that the job,
if she could hold it down, would pay at least twentyfive
a week. There had been an old lady in to see Maurice’s
                                                                               they all
paintings and she was thinking of buying one 5
felt very gay and drank quite a lot of wine, so that in the
md when it was time for goodbyes it was Eveline who felt
lonesome at going away from them all, instead of Eleanor
feeling lonesome at being left behind as she had ex-
pected.
    When Eleanor walked back along the platform froilf

         22:2

240
seeing the Hutchinses all off for New York the next eve-
ning, and their bags all labelled for the steamship Baltic
and their eyes all bright with the excitement of going
East and going abroad and the smell of coalsmoke and
the clang of engine bells and scurry of feet, she walked
with her fists clenched and her sharppointed nails dug
into the palms of her hands, saying to herself over and
                                                       iPs only a question of
over again: ^^Pll be going, too 5
          Pll be going, too.”
time 5



                             THE CAMERA EYE (i8)


        she was a very fashionable lady and adored bulb,

 terriers and had a gentleman friend who was famous foi

 his resemblance to King Edward

        she was a very fashionable lady and there were white

 lilies in the hall No my dear I can^t bear the scent of

 them in the room and the bullterriers bit the tradespeople

 and the little newsy No my dear they never bit nice peo-

 ple and they’re quite topping with Billy and his friends

         we all went coaching in a fourinhand and the man

 in the back blew a long horn and that’s where Dick Whit-

 tington stood with his cat and the bells              there were

 hampers full of luncheon and she had gray eyes and was

 very kind to her friend’s little boy though she loathed

 simply loathed most children and her gentleman friend

 who was famous for his resemblance to King Edward

                                                                                223

241
;ouldn’t bear them or the bullterriers and she kept asking

Why do you call him that?

        and you thought of Dick Whittington and the big

bells of B0W5 three times Lord Mayor of London and

looked into her gray eyes and said Maybe because I called

him that the first time I saw him and I didn^t like her

and I didn’t like the bullterriers and I didn’t like the

fourinhand but I wished Dick Whittington three times

Lord Mayor of London boomed the big bells of Bow and

I wished Dick Whittington I wished I was home but I

hadn’t any home and the man in the back blew a long

horn


                                ELEANOR STODDARD


   Working at Marshall Field’s was very different from
working at Mrs. Lang’s. At Mrs. Lang’s she had only
one boss but in the big store she seemed to have every-
body in the department over her. Still she was so refined
and cold and had such a bright definite little way of talk-
ing that although people didn’t like her much, she got
along well. Even Mrs. Potter and Mr. Spotmann, the
department heads, were a little afraid of her. News got
around that she was a society girl and didn’t really have
to earn a living at all. She was very sympathetic with the
customers about their problems of homemaking and had a
little humble-condescending way with Mrs. Potter and
admired her clothes, so that at the end of a month Mr:>.
Potter said to Mr. Spotmann,          think we have quite a
find in the Stoddard girl,” and Mr. Spotmann without
         224

242
opening his white trap of an old woman’s mouth said,
^^Pve thought so all along.”
   When Eleanor stepped out on Randolph one sunny
afternoon with her first week’s pay envelope in her hand
she felt pretty happy. She had such a sharp little smile
on her thin lips that a couple of people turned to look
at her as she walked along ducking her head into the
gusty wind to keep her hat from being blown off. She
turned down Michigan Avenue towards the Auditorium
looking at the bright shop windows and the verypale blue
sky and the piles of dovegray fluffy clouds over the lake
and the white blobs of steam from the locomotives. She
went into the deep amberlit lobby of the Auditorium An-
nex, sat down all by herself at a wicker table in the cornet
of the lounge and sat there a long while all by herself
drinking a cup of tea and eating buttered toast, ordering
the waiter about with a crisp little refined monied voice.
    Then she went to Moody House, packed her things
and moved to the Eleanor Club, where she got a room
for seven-fifty with board. But the room wasn’t much
better and everything still had the gray smell of a charit-
able institution, so the next week she moved again ta
a small residential hotel on the North Side where she got
room and board for fifteen a week. As that only left her
a balance of three-fifty—it had turned out that the job
only paid twenty, which actually only meant eighteen-

fifty when insurance was taken off—she had to go to see
her father again. She so impressed him with her rise in
the world and the chances of a raise that he promised her

five a week, although he was only making twenty himself
and was planning to marry again, to a Mrs, O’Toole, a
widow with five children who kept a boardinghouse out
Elsdon way.
    Eleanor refused to go to see her future stepmother^
and made her father promise to send her the money in
a moneyorder each week, as he couldn’t expect her to go
                                                                               225

243
all the way out to Elsdon to get it. When she left him
she kissed him on the forehead and made him feel quite
happy. All the time she was telling herself that this was
the very last time.
   Then she went back to the Hotel Ivanhoe and went up

to her room and lay on her back on the comfortable brass
bed looking round at her little room with its white wood-
work and its pale yellow wallpaper with darker satiny

stripes and the lace curtains in the window and the heavy
hangings. There was a crack in the plaster of the ceiling
and the carpet was worn, but the hotel was very refined,
she could see that, full of old couples living on small
incomes and the help were very elderly and polite and
she felt at home for the first time in her life.
    When Eveline Hutchins came back from Europe the
next Spring wearing a broad hat with a plume on it, full
of talk of the S^lon des Tuilenes and the Rue de la Paix
and museums and art exhibitions and the opera, she found
Eleanor a changed girl. She looked older than she was,
dressed quietly and fashionably, had a new bitter sharp
Way of talking. She was thoroughly established in the in-
terior decorating department at Marshall Field’s and
expected a raise any day, but she wouldn’t talk about it.
She had given up going to classes or haunting the Art
Institute and spent a great deal of time with an old maiden
lady who also lived at the Ivanhoe who was reputed to
be very rich and very stingy, a Miss Eliza PerHns.
    The first Sunday she was back Eleanor had Eveline to
tea at the hotel and they sat in the stuffy lounge talking
in refined whispers with the old lady. Eveline asked about
Eric and Maurice, and Eleanor supposed that they were
all right, but hadn’t seen them much since Eric had lost
his job at Marshall Field’s. He wasn’t turning out so
 well as she had hoped, she said. He and Maurice had
taken to drinking a great deal and going round with ques-
 tionable companions, and Eleanor rarely got a chance to
         126

244
see them. She had dinner every evening with Miss Perkins
and Miss Perkins thought a great deal of her and bought
her clothes and took her with her driving in the park and
sometimes to the theater when there was something really
worth while on, Minnie Maddern Fiske or Guy Bate^'
Post in an interesting play. Miss Perkins was the daughter
of a wealthy saloon keeper and had been played false in
her youth by a young lawyer whom she had trusted to
invest some money for her and whom she had fallen in
love with. He had run away with another girl and a num-
ber of cash certificates. Just how much she had left Eleanor
hadn^t been able to find out, but as she always took the
best seats at the theater and liked going to dinner at ex-
pensive hotels and restaurants and hired a carriage by the
half day whenever she wanted one, she gathered that she
must still be well off.
    After they had left Miss Perkins to go to the Hutchinses
for supper, Eveline said: ^Well, I declare—I don’t see
what you see in that   .  .  . that little old maid . .        . And
here I was just bursting to tell you a million things and
to ask you a million questions ... I think it was mean
of you.”
    ^^I’m very devoted to her, Eveline. I thought you’d
be interested in meeting any dear friend of mine.”
    ^^Oh, of course I am, dear, but, gracious, I can’t make
you out.”
    ^Well, you won’t have to see her again, though I could

tell by her manner that she thought you were lovely.”
    Walking from the Elevated station to the Hutchinses

it was more like old times again. Eleanor told about the
hard feelings that were growing between Mr. Spotmann
and Mrs. Potter and how they both wanted her to be on
their side, and made Eveline laugh, and Eveline confessed

that on the Kroonlmd coming back she had fallen very
much in love with a man from Salt Lake City, such a re--

 lief after all those foreigners, and Eleanor teased her

                                                                               227

245
about it and said he was probably a Mormon and Eveline
laughed and said, No, he was a judge, and admitted that
he was married already. ^^You see,” said Eleanor,
course he’s a Mormon.” But Eveline said that she knew
he wasn’t and that i£ he’d divorce his wife she’d marry
him m a minute. Then Eleanor said she didn’t believe in
divorce and if they hadn’t gotten to the door they would
have started quarrelling.
    That winter she didn’t see much of Eveline. Eveline
had many beaux and went out a great deal to part‘es and
Eleanor used to read about her on the society page Sun-
day mornings. She was very busy and often too tired at
night even to go to the theater with Miss Perkins. The
row between Mrs. Potter and Mr. Spotmann had come to
a head and the management had moved Mrs. Potter to
another department and she had let herself plunk into an
old Spanish chair and had broken down and cried right
in front of the customers and Eleanor had had to take
her to the dressing room and borrow smelling salts for
her and help her do up her peroxide hair into the big
pompadour again and consoled her by saying that she
 would probably like it much better over in the other build-
 ing anyway. After that Mr. Spotmann was very good-
 natured for several months. He occasionally took Eleanor
 out to lunch with him and they had a little joke that they
 laughed about together about Mrs. Potter’s pompadour
 wobbling when she’d cried in front of the customers. He
 sent Eleanor out on many little errands to wealthy homes^
 and the customers liked her because she was so refined
 and sympathetic and the other employees in the depart-
 ment hated her and nicknamed her ^^teacher’s pet.” Mr.
 Spotmann even said that he’d try to get her a percentage
 on commissions and talked often about giving her that
 raise to twentyfive a week.
     Then one day Eleanor got home late to supper and the
 old clerk at the hotel told her that Miss Perldris had
          228

246
been stricken with heartfailure while eating steak and
kidney pie for lunch and had died right in the hotel dining
room and that the body had been removed to the Irving
Funeral Chapel and asked her if she knew any of her
relatives that should be notified. Eleanor knew nothing
except that her financial business was handled by the Corn
Exchange Bank and that she thought that she had nieces
in Mound City, but didn^t know their names. Their clerk
was very worried about who would pay for the removal
of the body and the doctor and a week’s unpaid hotel bill
and said that all her things would be held under seal until
some qualified person appeared to claim them. He seemed
to think Miss Perkins had died especially to spite the
hotel management.
    Eleanor went up to her room and locked the door and
threw herself on the bed and cried a little, because she’d
been fond of Miss Perkins.
    Then a thought crept into her mind that made hei
heart beat fast. Suppose Miss Perkins had left her a for-
tune in her will. Things like that happened. Young men
who opened church pews, coachman who picked up a hand-
        old ladies were always leaving their fortunes to peo-
bag 3
ple like that.
   She could see it in headlines marshall field employee
INHERITS MILLION,
    She couldn’t sleep all night and in the morning she
found the manager of the hotel and offered to do anything
she could. She called up Mr. Spotmann and coaxed him
to give her the day off, explaining that she was virtually
prostrated by Miss Perkins’s death. Then she called up
the Corn Exchange Bank and talked to a Mr. Smith who
had been in charge of the Perkins estate. He assured her
that the bank would do everything in its power to protect
the heirs and the residuary legatees and said that the
will was in Miss Perkins’s safe deposit box and that he
was sure everything was in proper legal form.
                                                                              229

247
    Eleanor had nothing to do all day, so she got hold of
Eveline for lunch and afterwards they went to Keith’s
logether. She felt it wasn’t just proper to go to the theater
With her old friend still lying at the undertaker’s, but
she was so nervous and hysterical she had to do some-
thing to take her mind off this horrible shock. Eveline
Was very sympathetic and they felt closer than they had
since the Hutchinses had gone abroad. Eleanor didn’t
say anything about her hopes.
    At the funeral there were only Eleanor and the Irish
chambermaid at the hotel, an old woman who sniffled and
crossed herself a great deal, and Mr. Smith and a Mr.
Sullivan who was representing the Mound City relatives.
Eleanor wore black and the undertaker came up to her
and said, ^^Excuse me, miss, but I can’t refrain from re-
marking how lovely you look, just like a Bermuda lily.”
It wasn’t as bad as she had expected and afterwards
Eleanor and Mr. Smith and Mr. Sullivan, the representa-
tive of the law firm who had charge of the interests of
the relatives, were quite jolly together coming out of the
crematorium.
    It was a sparkling October day and everybody agreed
that October was the best month in the year and that the
minister had read the funeral service very beautifully.
Mr. Smith asked Eleanor wouldn’t she eat lunch with
them as she was mentioned in the will, and Eleanor’s
heart almost stopped beating and she cast down her eyes
and said she’d be very pleased.
   They all got into a taxi. Mr. Sullivan said it was pleas-
ant to roll away from the funeral chapel and such gloomy
thoughts. They went to lunch at de Yonghe’s and Eleanor
made them laugh telling them about how they’d acted at
the hotel and what a scurry everybody had been in, but
when they handed her the menu said that she couldn’t
eat a thing. Still when she saw the planked whitefish she
fiaid that she’d take just a little to pick to pieces on her
        230

248
plate. It turned out that the windy October air had mad^
them all hungry and the long ride in the taxi. Eleanor
enjoyed her lunch very much and after the whitefish she
ate a little Waldorf salad and then a peach melba.
    The gentlemen asked her whether she would mind if
they smoked cigars and Mr. Smith put on a rakish look
and said would she have a cigarette and she blushed and
said no, she never smoked and Mr. Sullivan said he’d
never respect a woman who smoked and Mr. Smith said
some of the girls of the best families in Chicago smoked
and as for himself he didn’t see the harm in it if they
didn’t make chimneys of themselves. After lunch they
walked across the street and went up in the elevator to
Mr. Sullivan’s office and there they sat down in big leather
chairs and Mr, Sullivan and Mr. Smith put on solemn
faces and Mr, Smith cleared his throat and began to read
the will. Eleanor couldn’t make it out at first and Mn
Smith had to explain to her that the bulk of the fortune
of three million dollars was left to the Florence Crittenton
home for wayward girls, but that the sum of one thou-'
sand dollars each was to the three nieces in Mound City
and that a handsome diamond brooch in the form of g
locomotive was left to Eleanor Stoddard and, ^Tf you cal]

at the Corn Exchange Bank some time tomorrow, Miss
Stoddard,” said Mr. Smith, “I shall be very glad to de^

liver it to you.”
    Eleanor burst out crying.
    They both were very sympathetic and so touched that
Miss Stoddard should be so touched by the remembrance
of her old friend. As she left the office, promising to call

for the brooch tomorrow, Mr. Sullivan was just saying in

the friendliest voice, “Mr. Smith, you understand that

I shall have to endeavor to break that will in the interesti

of the Mound City Perkinses,” and Mr. Smith said in the

friendliest voice, “I suppose so, Mr. Sullivan, but I don’/

see that you can get very far with it. It’s an ironclad

                                                                               I'll

249
copped-riveted document if I do say so as shouldn’t, be^

cause I drew it up myself.”
   So next day at eight Eleanor was on her way down to
Marshall Field’s again and there she stayed for several

years. She got the raise and the percentages on commis-

sions and she and Mr. Spotmann got to be quite thick,

but he never tried to make love to her and their relations
were always formal; that was a relief to Eleanor because
she kept hearing stories about floorwalkers and depart-
ment heads forcing their attentions on the young girl em-
ployees and Mr. Elwood of the furniture department had
been discharged for that very reason, when it came out that

little Lizzie Dukes was going to have a baby, but perhaps
that hadn’t been all Mr. Elwood’s fault as Lizzie Dukes
didn’t look as if she was any better than she should be;
anyway it seemed to Eleanor as if she’d spend the rest of
her life furnishing other people’s new drawingrooms and
diningrooms, matching curtains and samples of upholstery
and wallpaper, smoothing down indignant women cus-
tomers who’d been sent an oriental china dog instead of
an inlaid teak teatable or who even after they’d chosen it
themselves weren’t satisfied with the pattern on that
cretonne.
    She found Eveline Hutchms waiting for her one eve-
ning when the store closed. Eveline wasn’t crying but was
deathly pale. She said she hadn’t had anything to eat for
two days and wouldn’t Eleanor have some tea with her
over at the Sherman House or anywhere.
    They went to the Auditorium Annex and sat in the
lounge and ordered tea and cinnamon toast and then
Eveline told her that she’d broken off her engagement
with Dirk McArthur and that she’d decided not to kill
herself but to go to work. “I’ll never fall in love with
anybody again, that’s all, but I’ve got to do something
and you’re just wasting yourself in that stuflEy department
         232

250
                         you know you never get a chance to show
store, Eleanor 5
what you can doj you’re just wasting your ability.”
    Eleanor said that she hated it like poison but what was
she to do? ^^Why not do what we’ve been talking about
all these years . . . Oh, people make me so mad, they
never will have any nerve or do anything that’s fun or
interesting ... I bet you if we started a decorating
business we’d have lots of orders. Sally Emerson’ll give
us her new house to decorate and then everybody else’ll
just have to have us to be in the swim ... I don’t think
people really want to live in the horrible stuffy places
they live inj it’s just that they don’t know any better.”
    Eleanor lifted her teacup and drank several little sips.
She looked at her little white carefully manicured hand
with pointed nails holding the teacup. Then she said,
“But where’d we get the capital? We’d have to have a

little capital to start on.”
    “Dad’ll let us have something, I think, and maybe
                                       she’s an awfully good sport and
 Sally Emerson might j
then our first commission’ll launch us . . . Oh, do come

                       it’ll be such fun.”
 on, Eleanor j
     “ ^Hutchins and Stoddard, Interior Decorating.’ ” said
 Eleanor, putting down her teacup, “or maybe ^Miss
                                                  why, my dear, I think it’s a
 Hutchins and Miss Stoddard’ 5
 grand idea'” “Don’t you think just ^Eleanor Stoddard
 and Eveline Hutchins’ would be better?”
     “Oh, well, we can decide on the name when we hire a
 studio and have put it in the telephone book. Why don’t
 we put it this way, Eveline dear ... if you can get your
 friend Mrs. Emerson to give us the decorating of her new
 house, we’ll go in for it, if not we’ll wait until we have
                                                                            I know she
 a genuine order to start off on.” “All right j
 will. I’ll run right out and see her now.” Eveline had a
 high color now. She got to her feet and leaned over
 Eleanor and kissed her. “Oh, Eleanor, you’re a darlir^J?i

251
^Wait a minutCj we haven^t paid for our tea,’^ said

Eleanor.
    The next month the office was unbearable, and the
customers’ complaints and leaving the Ivanhoe in a huny
every morning and being polite to Mr. Spotmann and
thinking up little jokes to make him laugh. Her room at

the Ivanhoe seemed small and sordid and the smell of
cooking that came up through the window and the grease-
smell of the old elevator. Several days she called up that
she was sick and then found that she couldn’t stay in her
room and roamed about the city going to shops and mov-
ing pictureshows and then getting suddenly dead tired
and having to come home in a taxi that she couldn’t afford.
She even went back to the Art Institute once in a while,
but she knew all the pictures by heart and hadn’t the
patience to look at them any more. Then at last Eveline
got Mrs. Philip Paine Emerson to feeling that her new
house couldn’t do without a novel note in the dining-
room and they got her up an estimate much less than any
of the established decorators was asking, and Eleanor had
the pleasure of watching Mr. Spotmann’s astonished face
when she refused to stay even with a raise to forty a week
and said that she had a commission with a friend to deco-
rate the new Paine Emerson mansion in Lake Forest.
    ^Well, my dear,” said Mr. Spotmann, snapping his
square white mouth, ^hf you want to commit suicide of
your career I won’t be the one to stop you. You can leave
right this minute if you want to. Of course you forfeit
the Christmas bonus.” Eleanor’s heart beat fast. She
looked at the gray light that came through the office, and
the yellow cardcatalogue case and the letters on a file and
the little samples dangling from them. In the outer office
Ella Bowen the stenographer had stopped typings she
was probably listening. Eleanor sniffed the lifeless air
iha^ smelt of chintz and furniturevarnish and steamheat
         234

252
and people^s breath and then she said, ''All right, Mr.
Spotmann, I will.”
    It took her all day to get her pay and to collect the
insurance money due her and she had a long wrangle with
a cashier about the amount, so that it was late afternoon
before she stepped out into the driving snow of the streets
and went into a drugstore to call up Eveline.
    Eveline had already rented two floors of an old Vic-
torian house off Chicago Avenue, and they were busy all
winter decorating the office and showrooms downstairs
and the apartment upstairs where they were going to
live, and doing Sally Emerson’s diningroom. They got
a colored maid named Amelia who was a very good cook
although she drank a little, and they had cigarettes and
cocktails at the end of the afternoon and little dinners
wnth wine, and found a downattheheels French dress-
maker to make them evening gowns to wear when they
went out with Sally Emerson and her set, and rode in
taxis and got to know a lot of really interesting people.
By Spring when they finally got a check for five hundred
dollars out of Philip Paine Emerson they were a thou^
sand dollars in the hole, but they were living the way
they liked. The diningroom was considered a little ex-
treme, but some people liked it, and a few more orders
came. They made many friends and started going round
with artists again and with special writers on The Daily
           and The Amerkm who took them out to dinner
in foreign restaurants that were very smoky and where
they talked a great deal about modern French painting
and the Middle West and going to New York. They went
to the Armory Show and had a photograph of Brancusi’s
Golden Bird over the desk in the office and copies of the
Little Review and Poetry among the files of letters from

clients and unpaid bills from wholesalers.
    Eleanor went out a great deal with Tom Custis who
was an elderly redfaced man, fond of music and chamS'-

                                                                               235

253
girls and drinking, who belonged to all the clubs and
(or years had been a great admirer of Mary Garden.
He had a box at the opera and a Stevens-Duryea and
 nothing to do except go to tailors and visit specialists and
occasionally blackball a Jew or a newcomer applying for
membership in some club he belonged to. The Armours
had bought out his father’s meatpacking concern when
he was still a college athlete and he hadn’t done a strok<=
of work since. He claimed to be thoroughly sick of sock

life and enjoyed taking an interest in the girls’ decorating
business. He kept in close touch with Wall Street and
\vould occasionally turn over to Eleanor a couple of shares
that he was trading in. If they rose it was her gam, if
they fell it was his loss. He had a wife in a private sani-
tarium and he and Eleanor decided they’d be just friends.
Sometimes he was a little too affectionate coming home in
a taxicab in the evening, but Eleanor would scold him and
he’d be very contrite the next day, and send her great
boxes of white flowers.
    Eveline had several beaux, writers and illustrators and
people like that, but they never had any money and ate
and drank everything in the house when they came to
dinner. One of them, Freddy Seargeant, was an actor and
producer temporarily stranded in Chicago. He had friends
in the Shubert office and his great ambition was to put
on a pantomime like Reinhardt’s Sunrnrtmy only based
on Maya Indian stories. He had a lot of photographs of
Maya ruins, and Eleanor and Eveline began to design
costumes for it and settings. They hoped to get Tom
Custis or the Paine Emersons to put up money for a
production in Chicago.
    The main trouble was with the music. A young pianist
whom Tom Custis had sent to Paris to study began to
write it and came and played it one night. They had quite
a party for him. Sally Emerson came and a lot of fashion-
able people, but Tom Custis drank too many cocktails to
         236

254
be able to hear a note and Amelia the cook got drunk
and spoiled the dinner and Eveline told the young pianist
that his music sounded like movie music and he went off
in a huff. When everybody had gone Freddy Seargeant
and Eveline and Eleanor roamed around the ravaged
apartment feeling very bad indeed. Freddy Seargeant
twisted his black hair, slightly splotched with gray, in his
long hands and said he was going to kill himself, and
Eleanor and Eveline quarrelled violently.
    ^^But it did sound like movingpicture music and, after
all, why shouldn’t it?” Eveline kept saying. Then Freddy
Seargeant got his hat and went out saying, ^^You women
are making life a hell for me,” and Eveline burst out
crying and got hysterical and Eleanor had to send for a
doctor.
    The next day they scraped up fifty dollars to send
Freddy back to New York, and Eveline went back to live
at the house on Drexel Boulevard, leaving Eleanor to
carry on the decorating business all alone.
    Next Spring Eleanor and Eveline sold for five hundred
some chandeliers that they had picked up In a junk shop
on the west side for twentyfive dollars and were just
writing out checks for their more pressing debts when
a telegram arrived.
    SIGNED CONTRACT WITH SHUBERTS PRODUCTION RETURN
OF THE NATIVE WILL YOU DO SCENERY COSTUMES HUNDRED
FIFTY A WEEK EACH MUST COME ON NEW YORK IMME-
DIATELY MUST HAVE YOU WIRE IMMEDIATELY HOTEL DES
ARTISTES CENTRAL PARK SOUTH FREDDY
    ^^Eleanor, weVe got to do it,” said Eveline, taking a
cigarette out of her handbag and walking round the room
puffing at it furiously. “It’ll be a rush, but let’s make
the Twentieth Century this afternoon,” “It’s about noon
now,” said Eleanor in a trembly voice. Without answer-
ing Eveline went to the phone and called up the Pull-
man office. That evening they sat in their section looking

                                                                               237

255
^ut o£ the window at the steelworks of Indiana Harbor,

the big cement works belching puttycolorcd smoke, the

Earing furnaces of Gaiy disappearing in smokeswirling
winter dusk. Neither of them could say anything.



                           THE CAMERA EYE (19)


       the methodist minister’s wife was a tall thin woman

who sang little songs at the piano in a spindly lost voice

who’d heard you liked books and grew flowers and

vegetables and was so interested because she’d once been

an episcopalian and loved beautiful things and had had

stories she had written published in a magazine and she

was younger than her husband who was a silent black-

haired man with a mouth like a mousetrap and tobacco-

juice on his chin and she wore thin white dresses and used

perfume and talked in a bell-like voice about how things

were lovely as a lily and the moon was bright as a bubble

full to bursting behind the big pine when we walked back

along the shore and you felt you ought to 'put your arm

round her and kiss her only you didn’t want to and any-

way you wouldn’t have had the nerve walking slow

through the sand and the pine needles imder the big

moon swelled to bursting like an enormous drop of quick-

silver and she talked awful sad about the things she had

hoped for and you thought it was too bad

         238

256
       you liked books and Gibbon^s Decline and Fall o)

the Roman Emfire and Captain Marryat^s novels and

wanted to go away and to sea and to foreign cities Carcas-

sonne Marakesh Isfahan and liked things to be beautiful

and wished you had the nerve to hug and kiss Martha

the colored girl they said was half Indian old Emma’s

daughter and little redheaded Mary I taught how to swim

if I only had the nerve breathless nights when the moon

was full but Oh God not lilies



                                                  NEWSREEL XIV


            BOMBARDIER STOPS AUSTRALIAN

        colonel says democrats have brought distress to nation

I’ll resign when I die Huerta snarls in grim defi and half
Mexico will die with me no flames were seen but the vast
plume of blackened steam from the crater waved a mile high
m the sky and volcanic ash fell on Macomber Flats thirteen

miles distant
        Eggs Noisy? No Pokerchips-

                        Way down on the levee
                           In old Alabamy
                        There^s daddy and mammy
                           And Efhram and Sammy

              MOONFAIRIES DANCE ON RAVINIA GREENS

    WILSON WILL TAKE ADVICE OF BUSINESS

        admits he threw bomb policewoman buys drinjb after

one loses on wheat slam as burglar

257
                          On a moonlight night
                              You can find them all
                          While they are waiting
                              Banjoes are syncopating
                          What^s that they^re all saying
                              What^s that they^re all singing

        recognizing James scrawl the president seized the cracker
and pulled out the fuse. A stream of golden gumdrops fell

over the desk, then glancing at the paper the Chief Executive

read “Don’t eat too many of them because Mama says they’ll
make you sick if you do.”

      RIDING SEAWOLF IN MEXICAN WATERS

                  They all keep aswaying
                     Ahumming and swinging
                 It^s the good ship Robert E, Lee
                      That^s come to carry the cotton away

                     ISADORA Duncan’s new happiness
        IWW troublemakers overran a Garibaldi birthday cele
bration at Rosebank Staten Island this afternoon, insulted the
Italian flag, pummeled and clubbed members of the Italian

Rifle Society and would have thrown the American flag to
the dirt if

         SIX UNCLAD BATHING GIRLS BLACK
                         EYES OF HORRID MAN

        Indian divers search for drowned boy’s body. Some of
che witnesses say they saw a woman in the crowd. She was
hit with a brick. The man in gray took refuge behind her
tkirts to fire. The upper decks and secluded parts of the
Scat are the spooners’ paradise where liberties are often taken
with intoxicated young girls whose mothers should not have
permitted them to go on a public boat unescorted.

MIDWEST MAY MAKE OR BREAK WILSON
  TELL CAUSES OF UNREST IN LABOR WORLD
         ?40

258
          I m a Swiss admiral proceeding to America,” and the
 copper called a taxi

                        See them shtt^ffling along
                           Hear their music and song
                        Ids stmfly greaty matCy
                            Waiting on the levee
                        Waiting

                                    for
                                         the
                                              Robert
                                                          E.
                                                               Lee.



        EMPEROR OF THE CARIBBEAN


         When Minor C. Keith died all the newspapers
carried his picture, a brighteyed man with a hawknose
and a respectable bay window, and an uneasy look
under the eyes.
        Minor C. Keith was a rich man’s son, born in a
family that liked the smell of money, they could smell
money half way round the globe in that family.
        His Uncle was Henry Meiggs, the Don Enrique
of the West Coast. His father had a big lumber busi-
ness and handled realestate in Brooklyn;
        young Keith was a chip of the old block



        (Back in fortynine Don Enrique had been drawn
to San Francisco by the gold rush. He didn’t go pros-
pecting in the hills, he didn’t die of thirst sifting alkali-
dust in Death Valley. He sold outfits to the other
guys. He stayed in San Frandsco and played politics

259
                                                                                           ;





And high finance until he got in too deep and had to

get aboard ship in a hurry.
        The vessel took him to Chile. He could smell
money in Chile.
        He was the capitalista yanqui. He’d build the

railroad from Santiago to Valparaiso. There were
guano deposits on the Chincha Islands. Meiggs could

smell money in guano. He dug himself a fortune out

of guano, became a power on the West Coast, juggled

figures, railroads, armies, the politics of the local

caciques and politocosj they were all chips in a huge
pokergame. Behind a big hand he heaped up the

dollars.
        He financed the unbelievable Andean railroads.
        When Tomas Guardia got to be dictator of Costa
Rica he wrote to Don Enrique to build him a railroad
        Meiggs was busy in the Andes, a $75,000 dollar

contract was hardly worth his while,
        so he sent for his nephew Minor Keith.



        They didn’t let grass grow under their feet in
that family:
        at sixteen Minor Keith had been on his own, sell-
ing collars and ties in a clothingstore.
        After that he was a lumber surveyor and ran a
lumber business.
        When his father bought Padre Island off Corpus
Christi Texas he sent Minor down to make money out
of it.
         Minor Keith started raising cattle on Padre Island
 tnd seining for fish,
         but cattle and fish didn’t turn over money fast
 enough
         50 he bought hogs and chopped up the steers and
         24.2

260
boiled the meat and fed it to the hogs and choppec
up the fish and fed it to the hogs,
        but hogs didn’t turn over money fast enough,
        so he was glad t6 be off to Limon.


        Limon was one of the worst pestholes on the
Caribbean, even the Indians died there of malaria,
yellow jack, dysentery.
        Keith went back up to New Orleans on the
steamer John G. Meiggs to hire workers to build the
railroad. He offered a dollar a day and grub and
hired seven hundred men. Some of them had been
down before in the filibustering days of William
Walker.
         Of that bunch about twentyfive came out alive.
         The rest left their whiskyscalded carcases to rot

in the swamps.
         On another load he shipped down fifteen hun-
            they all died to prove that only Jamaica Negroes
 dred j
 could live in Limon.



          Minor Keith didn’t die.



          In 1882 there were twenty miles of railroad built

 and Keith was a million dollars in the hole 5
          the railroad had nothing to haul.
          Keith made them plant bananas so that the raiL

 road might have something to haul, to market the

  bananas he had to go into the shipping business}

          this was the beginning of the Caribbean fruittrade

          All the while the workers died of whisky, malaria

  yellow jack, dysentery.
          Minor Keith’s three brothers cfied.

                                                                                243

261
        Minor Keith didn’t die.
        He built railroads, opened retail stores up and
down the coast in Bluefields, Belize, Limon, bought
and sold rubber, vanilla, tortoiseshell, sarsaparilla, any-
thing he could buy cheap he bought, anything he could

sell dear he sold.
        In 1898 in cooperation with the Boston Fruit
Company he formed the United Fruit Company that
has since become one of the most powerful industrial
units in the world.
        In 1912 he incorporated the International Rail-
roads of Central America j
        all of it built out of bananas 5
        in Europe and the United States people had
started to eat bananas,
        so they cut down the jungles through Central
America to plant bananas,
        and built railroads to haul the bananas,
        and every year more steamboats of the Great
White Fleet
        steamed north loaded with bananas,
        and that is the history of the American empire in
the Caribbean,
        and the Panama canal and the future Nicaragua
canal and the marines and the battleships and the
bayonets.


        Why that uneasy look under the eyes, in the pic-
ture of Minor C. Keith the pioneer of the frcut trade,
the railroad builder, in all the pictures the newspapers
'^ried of him when he died?





        244

262
                            THE CAMERA EYE (20)


       when the streetcarmen went out on strike in Law-

rence in sympathy with what the hell they were a lot

of wops anyway bohunks hunkies that didn’t wash theii

necks ate garlic with squalling brats and fat oily wives

the damn dagoes they put up a notice for volunteers

good clean young

        to man the streetcars and show the foreign agitators

this was still a white man’s

        well this fellow lived in Matthews and he’d always

wanted to be a streetcar conductor             they said Mn

Grover had been a streetcar conductor in Albany and

drank and was seen on the street with floosies

        well this fellow lived in Matthews and he went ovci

to Lawrence with his roommate and they reported in

Lawrence and people yelled at them Blacklegs Scabs but

those that weren’t wops were muckers a low element

 they liked each other a lot this fellow did and his room-

 mate and he got up on the platform and twirled the bright

 brass handle and clanged the befl

        it was in the carbarn          his roommate was fiddling

 with something between the bumpers and this fellow

 twirled the shiny brass handle and the car started and

 he ran down his roommate and his head was mashed just

 like that between the bumpers killed him dead just like

                                                                                HS

263
that right there in the carbarn and now the fellow’s got

to face his roommate’s folks





                          J. WARD MOOREHOUSE


   In Pittsburgh Ward Moorehouse got a job as a re-
porter on The Times Disfatch and spent six months writ-
ing up Italian weddings, local conventions of Elks, obscure
deaths, murders and suicides among Lithuanians, Al-
banians, Croats, Poles, the difficulties over naturalization
papers of Greek restaurant keepers, dinners of the Sons
of Italy. He lived m a big red frame house, at the lower
end of Highland Avenue, kept by a Mrs. Cook, a
crotchety old woman from Belfast who had been forced
to take lodgers since her husband, who had been a fore-
man in one of the Homestead mills, had been crushed by
a crane dropping a load of pigiron over him. She made
Ward his breakfasts and his Sunday dinners and stood
over him while he was eating them alone in the stujffy
furniturecrowded diningroom telling him about her youth
in the north of Ireland and the treachery of papists and
the virtues of the defunct Mr. Cook.

' It was a bad time for Ward. He had no friends in Pitts-
burgh and he had colds and sore throats all through the
cold grimy sleety winter. He hated the newspaper office
 ,md the inclines and the overcast skies and the breakneck
wooden stairs he was always scrambling up and down, and
the smell of poverty and cabbage and children and wash-
ing in the rattletrap tenements where he was always seek-
 ing out Mrs. Piretti whose husband ^had been killed in a
 rumpus in a saloon on Locust Street or Sam Burkovich
 who’d been elected president of the Ukrainian singing
         246

264
society, or some woman with sudsy hands whose child haxi
been slashed by a degenerate. He never got home to the
house before three or four in the morning and by the
time he had breakfasted round noon there never seemed
to be any time to do anything before he had to call up
the office for assignments again. When he had first gotten
to Pittsburgh he had called to see Mr. McGill, whom
he’d met with Jarvis Oppenheimer in Pans. Mr. McGill
remembered him and took down his address and told him
to keep in touch because he hoped to find an opening for
him in the new information bureau that was being or-
ganized by the Chamber of Commerce, but the weeks went
by and he got no word from Mr. McGill. He got an
occasional dry note from Annabelle Marie about legal
                        she would divorce him charging nonsup-
technicalities 5
port, desertion and cruelty. AU he had to do was to refuse

to go to Philadelphia when the papers were served on
 him. The perfume on the blue notepaper raised a faint

 rancor of desire for women in him. But he must keep
 himself clean and think of his career.
     The worst time was his weekly day off. Often he’d

 stay all day sprawled on the bed, too depressed to go out

 into the black slush of the streets. He sent to correspond-

 ence schools for courses in journalism and advertising and
 even for a course in the care of fruit trees on the impulse

 to throw up everything and go West and get a job on a

 ranch or somethings but he felt too listless to follow them
 and the little booklets accumulated week by week on the

 table in his room. Nothing seemed to be leading any-

  where. He’d go over and over again his whole course of

  action since he’d left Wilmington that day on the train to

  go down to Ocean City. He must have made a mist^e
  somewhere but he couldn’t see where. He took to playing

  solitaire, but he couldn’t even keep his mind on that.

  He’d forget the cards and sit at the table with a ginger-

  breadcolored velveteen cloth on it, looking past the pot

                                                                                 247

265
of dusty artifiaai ferns ornamented with a crepe paper

cover and a dusty pink bow off a candybox, down into the
broad street where trolleycars went by continually scrap-

ing round the curve and where the arclights coming on in

the midafternoon murk shimmered a little in the black

ice of the gutters. He thought a lot about the old days at
Wilmington and Mane O’Higgins and his piano lessons

ind fishing in an old skiff along the Delaware when he’d
been a kid; he’d get so nervous that he’d have to go out
and would go and drink a hot chocolate at the sodafoun-
tain on the next corner and then go down town to a cheap
movie or vaudeville show. He took to smoking three
stogies a day, one after each meal. It gave him something
he could vaguely look forward to.
    He called once or twice to see Mr. McGill at his office
in the Frick Building. Each time he was away on a busi-
ness trip. He’d have a little chat with the girl at the desk
while waiting and then go away reluctantly, saying, “Oh,
yes, he said he was going on a trip,” or, “He must have
forgotten the appointment,” to cover his embarrassment
when he had to go away. He was loath to leave the
brightly lit office anteroom, with its great shiny mahogany
chairs with lions’ heads on the arms and the tables with
lions’ claws for feet and the chirrup of typewriters from
behind partitions, and telephone bells ringing and well-
dressed clerks and executives bustling in and out. Down
at the newspaper office it was noisy with clanging presses
and smelt sour of printer’s ink and moist rolls of paper
and sweating copyboys running round in green eyeshades.
 And not to know any really nice people, never to get an
assignment that wasn’t connected with working people or
 foreigners or criminals; he hated it.
     One day in the Spring he went to the Schenley to inters
 view a visiting travel lecturer. He felt good about it as he
 hoped to wheedle a by-line out of the dty 'editor. He was
 picking his way through the lobby crowded by the arrival
         248

266
of a state convention of Kiwanians when he ran into Mr,
McGill. ^Why, hello, Moorehouse,” said Mr. McGillj
In a casual tone as if he’d been seeing him all along,
glad I ran Into you. Those fools at the office mislaid youi
address. Have you a minute to spare?” “Yes, Indeed, Mr.
McGill,” said Ward. “I have an appointment to see a man
but he can wait.” “Never make a man wait if you have
an appointment with him,” said Mr. McGill. “Well, this
isn’t a business appointment,” said Ward, looking up into
Mr. McGill’s face with his boyish blue-eyed smile. “He
won’t mind waiting a minute.”
    They went into the writing room and sat down on a
tapestried sofa. Mr. McGill explained that he had just
been appointed temporary general manager to reorganize
the Bessemer Metallic Furnishings and Products Com-
pany that handled a big line of byproducts of the Home-
stead Mills. He was looking for an ambitious and ener-
getic man to handle the advertising and promotion. “I
remember that booklet you showed me in Paris, Moore-
house, and I think you’re the man.” Ward looked at the
floor. “Of course that would mean giving up my present
work.” “What’s that?” “Newspaper work.” “Oh, drop
that^ there’s no future in that . . . We’d have to make
someone else nominal advertising manager for reasons we
won’t go into now . . . but you’ll be the actual execu-
tive. What kind of a salary would you expect?”
    Ward looked Mr. McGill in the eyes, the blood stopped
in his ears while he heard his own voice saying casually:
    “How about a hundred a week?”
     Mr. McGill stroked his moustache and smiled. “Well,
we’ll thrash that out later,” he said, getting to his feet.
“I think I can advise you strongly to give up your present
 work . . . I’ll call up Mr. Bateman about it ... sc
 that he’ll understand why we’re taking you away from
 him ... No hard feelings, you understand, on account
 of your resigning suddenly . .  never want hard feel

                                                                               249

267
ings .   . . Come down and see me tomorrow at ten. You
know the office in the Frick Building,”
    “I think I’ve got some valuable ideas about adver-
tising, Mr. McGill. It’s the work I’m most interested in
doing,” said Ward. Mr, McGill wasn’t looking at him
any more. He nodded and went off. Ward went on up
to interview his lecturer, afraid to let himself feel too
jubilant yet.
    The next day was his last in a newspaper office. He
accepted a salary of seventyfive with a promise of a raise
as soon as returns warranted it, took a room and bath at
the Schenley, had an office of his own in the Frick Build-
ing where he sat at a desk with a young man named
Oliver Taylor who was a nephew of one of the directors
who was being worked up through the organization,
Oliver Taylor was a firstrate tennis player and belonged
to all the clubs and was only too glad to let Moorehouse
do the work. When he found that Moorehouse had been
abroad and had had his clothes made in England he put
him up at the Sewickley Country Club and took him out
with him for drinks after officehours. Little by little
Moorehouse got to know people and to be invited out as
an eligible bachelor. He started to play golf with an in-
structor on a small course over in Allegheny where he
hoped nobody he knew would go. When he could play a
fair game he went over to Sewickley to try it out.
   One Sunday afternoon Oliver Taylor went with him
and pointed out all the big executives of the steel mills
and the mining properties and the oil industry out on the
links on a Sunday afternoon, making ribald remarks about
each one that Ward tittered at a little bit, but that seemed
to him in very bad taste. It was a sunny May afternoon
and he could smell locustblossoms on the breeze off the
fat lands along the Ohio, and there were the sharp whang
of the golfballs and the flutter of bright dresses on the
lawn round the clubhouse, and frazzles of laughter and
        250

268
baritone snatches of the safe talk of business men coming
on the sunny breeze that still had a little scorch of furnace
smoke in it. It was hard to keep the men he was intro-
duced to from seeing how good he felt.
    The rest of the time he did nothing but work. He got
  ^
his stenographer, Miss Rodgers, a plainfaced spinster who
knew the metal products business inside out from having
worked fifteen years in Pittsburgh ofiices, to get him boob
on the industry that he read at his hotel in the evenings,
so that at executive conferences he astonished them by hi3
knowledge of the processes and products of the industry.
His mind was full of augerbits, canthooks, mauls, sash-
                                                                       sometimes in
weights, axes, hatchets, monkeywrenches 3
the lunch hour he’d stop in to a hardware store on the
pretext of buying a few brads or tacks and talk to the
storekeeper. He read Crowds Jr and various books on
psychology, tried to imagine himself a hardware merchant
or the executive of Hammacher Schlemmer or some other
big hardware house, and puzzled over what kind of litera-
ture from a factory would be appealing to him. Shaving
while his bath was running in the morning he would see
long processions of andirons, grates, furnace fittings,
pumps, sausagegrinders, drills, calipers, vises, casters,
drawerpulls pass between his face and the mirror and
wonder how they could be made attractive to the retail
                                                                              why was
trade. He was shaving himself with a Gillette 3
he shaving with a Gillette instead of some other kind of
razor? ^^Bessemer” was a good name, smelt of money
and mighty rolling mills and great executives stepping
out of limousines. The thing to do was to interest the
hardware buyer, to make him feel a part of something
mighty and strong, he would think as he picked out a
necktie. ^^Bessemer,” he’d say to himself as he ate break
fast. Why should our cotterpins appeal more than any
other cotterpins, he’d ask himself as he stepped on the
streetcar. Jolting in the straphanging crowd on the way

269
  downtown, staring at the headlines in the paper without

  seeing them, chainlinks and anchors and ironcouplings
  and malleable elbows and unions and bushings and nipple!&
  and pipecaps would jostle in his head. “Bessemer.’^
      When he asked for a raise he got it, to $125.
      At a country club dance he met a blond girl who
  danced very well. Her name was Gertrude Staple and
   she was the only daughter of old Horace Staple who was
   director of several corporations, and was reputed to own
  E big slice of Standard Oil stock. Gertrude was engaged

   to Oliver Taylor, though they did nothing but quarrel
  when they were together, so she confided to Ward while
  they were sitting out a dance. Ward^s dress suit fitted well
  and he looked much younger than most of the men at the
   dance. Gertrude said that the men in Pittsburgh had no
   allure. Ward talked about Paris and she said that she was
* bored to tears and would rather live in Nome, Alaska,
   than in Pittsburgh. She was awfully pleased that he knew
   Paris and he talked about the Tour d’Argent and the
   Hotel Wagram and the Ritz bar and he felt very sore
  that he hadn^t a car, because he noticed that she was mak-
   ing it easy for him to ask her to let him take her home.
   But next day he sent her some flowers with a little note in
   French that he thought would make her laugh. The next
   Saturday afternoon he went to an automobile school to
   take lessons in driving a car, and strolled past the Stutz
   sales agency to see what kind of terms he could get to
   buy a roadster on.
      One day Oliver Taylor came into the office with a
   funny smile on his face and said, ^Ward, Gertrude^s got
   a crush on you. She catft talk about anything else . . .
                     I don’t give a damn. She’s too goddam
   Go ahead j                                                                  much
   trouble for me to handle. She tires me out in a half an
   hour.”
       ^Tt’s probably just because she doesn’t know me,” said
   Ward, blushing a little.

           252

270
    ‘^Too bad her old man won’t let her marry anything
but a millionaire. You might get some lovin’ out of it,
though.”
         haven’t got the time for that stuff,” said Ward.
    “It don’t leave me time for anything else,” said Taylor,
“Well, so long ... You hold down the fort; I’ve got
a Imicheon date with a swell girl . . . she’s a warm baby
an’ she’s dancing in the ^Red Mill,’ first row, third from
the left.” He winked, and slapped Ward on the back and
went off.
    The next time that Ward went to call at the big house
of the Staples that lay back from the trees he went in
a red Stutz roadster that he’d taken out on trial. He
handled it well enough, although he turned in too quickly
at the drive and slaughtered some tulips in a fiowerbed,
Gertrude saw him from the library window and kidded
him about it. He said he was a rotten driver, always had
been and always would be. She gave him tea and a cock-
tail at a little table under an appletree back of the house
and he wondered all the time he was talking to her
 whether he ought to tell her about his divorce. He told
 her about his unhappy life with Annabelle Strang. She
 was very sympathetic. She knew of Dr. Strang. “And 1
 was hoping you were just an adventurer . . . from
 plowboy to president, you know . . . that sort of thing.”
     “But I am,” he said and they both laughed and he
 could see that she was really crazy about him.
     That night they met at a dance and walked down to
 the end of the conservatory where it was very steamy
 among the orchids, and he kissed her and told her that
 she looked like a pale yellow orchid. After that they al-
  ways sneaked off whenever they got a chance. She had a
 way of going limp suddenly in his arms under his kisses

 that made him sure that she loved him. But when he
  got home after those evenings he’d be too nervous and
  excited to sleep, and would pace up and down the room

                                                                                ^53

271
wanting a woman to sleep with, and cursing himself out.
Often he’d take a cold bath and tell himself he must at-
tend to business and not worry about those things or let a
girl get under his skin that way. The streets in the lower
part of town were full of prostitutes, but he was afraid
of catching a disease or being blackmailed. Then one
night after a party Taylor took him to a house that he
said was thoroughly reliable where he met a pretty dark
Polish girl who couldn’t have been more than eighteen,
but he didn’t go there very often as it cost fifty dollars,
and he was always, nervous when he was in the place
for fear there’d be a police raid and he’d have blackmail
to pay.
    One Sunday afternoon Gertrude told him that her
mother had scolded her for being seen about with him
w much on account of his having a wife in Philadelphia.
The notice of the decree had come the morning before.
Ward was in high spirits and told her about it and asked
her to marry him. They were at the free organ recital in
Carnegie Institute, a good place to meet because nobody
who was anybody ever went there. “Come over to the
Schenley and I’ll show you the decree.” The music had
started. She shook her head, but patted his hand that lay
on the plush seat beside her knee. They went out in the
middle of the number. The music got on their nerves.
They stood talking a long while in the vestibule. Gertrude
looked miserable and haggard. She said she was in
wretched health and that her father and mother would
never consent to her marrying a man who didn’t have as
much income as she did and she wished she was a poor
stenographer or telephone girl that could do as she liked
and that she loved him very much and would always love
him and thought she’d take to drink or dope or some-
Ting because life was just too terrible.
   Ward was very cold and kept his jaw set square and
said that she couldn’t really care for him and that as far
        254

272
as he was concerned that was the end and that if they met
they^d be good friends. He drove her out Highland
Avenue in the Stutz that wasn^t paid for yet and showed
her the house heM lived in when he first came to Pitts-
burgh and talked of going out West and starting an adver-
tising business of his own and finally left her at a friend’s
house in Highland Park where she’d told her chauffeur
to pick her up at six.
    He went back to the Schenley and had a cup of black
coffee sent up to his room and felt very bitter and settled
down to work on some copy he was getting out, saying,
^^To hell with the bitch,” all the time under his breath.
    He didn’t worry much about Gertrude in the months
that followed because a strike came on at Homestead and
there were strikers killed by the mine guards and certain
writers from New York and Chicago who were senti-
mentalists began to take a good deal of space in the press
with articles flaying the steel industry and the feudal con-
ditions in Pittsburgh as they called them, and the progres-
sives in Congress were making a howl, and it was rumored
that people wanting to make politics out of it were calling
for a congressional investigation. Mr. McGill and Ward
had dinner together all alone at the Schenley to talk about
the situation, and Ward said that what was necessary was
an entirely new line in the publicity of the industry. It was
the business of the industry to educate the public by care-
fully planned publicity extending over a term of years.
Mr. McGill was very much impressed and said he’d talk
around at directors’ meetings about the feasibility of
founding a joint information bureau for the entire in-^

dustry. Ward said he felt he ought to be at the head of it^

because he was just wasting has time at the Bessemer
Products; that had all simmered down to a routine job

that anybody could take care of. He talked of going to
Chicago and starting an advertising agency of his own.
Mr. McGill smiled and stroked his steelgray miostache

                                                                               ^5S

273
                                                          you stay around here
and said, ^^Not so fast, young man 5
a while yet and on my honor you won’t regret it,” and
Ward said that he was willing, but here he’d been in
Pittsburgh five years and where was he getting?
   The information bureau was founded, and Ward was
put in charge of the actual work at $10,000 a year and
began to play stocks a little with his surplus money, but
there were several men over him earning larger salaries
who didn’t do anything but get in his way, and he was
very restless. He felt he ought to be married and have
an establishment of his own. He had many contacts in
different branches of the casting and steel and oil in-
dustries, and felt he ought to entertain. Giving dinners at
the Fort Pitt or the Schenley was expensive and somehow
didn’t seem solid.
    Then one morning he opened his newspaper to find that
Horace Staple had died of angina pectoris the day before
while going up in the elevator of the Carnegie Building,
and that Gertrude and her mother were prostrated at their
palatial residence in Sewickley. He immediately sat down
in the writing room, although it would make him late at
the office, and wrote Gertrude a note:

Dearest Gertrude:
    In this terrible moment of grief, allow me to remind
you that I think of you constantly. Let me know at once if
I can be of any use to you in any way. In the valley of
the shadow of death we must realize that the Great Giver
to whom we owe all love and wealth and all affection
around the jocund fireside is also the Grim Reaper . . .

    After staring at the words, chewing the end of the pen
a minute, he decided that it was a bit thick about the Grim
Reaper and copied the note out again leaving out the
last sentence, signed it ^^Your Devoted Ward,” and sent
it out to Sewickley by special messenger*
    At noon he was just leaving for lunch when the office.
         256

274
boy told him there was a lady on his phone. It was Ger-
trude. Her voice was trembly but she didn’t seem too
terribly upset. She begged him to take her out to dinner
that night somewhere where they wouldn’t be seen because
the house and everything gave her the creeps and that
she’d go mad if she heard any more condolences. He told
her to meet him in the lobby of the Fort Pitt and he’d
run her out to some little place where they could be quiet
and talk.
    That evening there was an icy driving wind. The sky
had been leaden all day with inky clouds driving out of
the northwest. She was so muffled up in furs that he didn’t
recognize her when she came into the lobby. She held out
her hand to him and said, ^^Let’s get out of here/’ as
soon as she came up to him. He said he knew a little road-
house on the way to McKeesport but thought the drive
would be too cold for her in his open roadster. She said^
                   do let’s ... I love a blizzard.” When she
“Let’s go 5
got into the car she said in a trembling voice, “Glad to
see your old flame, Ward?” and he said, “God, Gertrude,
I amj but are you glad to see me?” And then she said^
“Don’t I look glad?” Then he started to mumble some-
thing about her father, but she said, “Please let’s not talk
about that.”
    The wind was howling behind them all the way up the
Monongahela valley, with occasional lashing flurries of
snow. Tipples and bessemer furnaces and tall ranks of
chimneys stood out inky black against a low woolly sky
that caught all the glare of flaming metal and red slag
and the white of arcs and of locomotive headlights. At
 one crossing they almost ran into a train of coalcars. Hei
 hand tightened on his arm when the car skidded as he
 put on the brakes.
     “That was a narrow squeak,” he said through clenched

 teeth..
                                                                               257

275
         don’t care. I don’t care about anything tonight,”
she said.
   He had to get out to crank the car as he had stalled the
motor. ^^It’ll be all right if we don’t freeze to death,”
he said. When he’d clambered back into the car she leaned
over and kissed him on the cheek. “Do you still want to
marry me? I love you, Ward.” The motor raced as he
turned and kissed her hard on the mouth the way he’d
kissed Annabelle that day in the cottage at Ocean City.
“Of course I do, dear,” he said.
    The roadhouse was kept by a French couple, and Ward
talked French to them and ordered a chicken dinner and
red wine and hot whisky toddies to warm them up while
they were waiting. There was no one else in the road-
house and he had a table placed right in front of the gas-
logs at the end of a pink and yellow diningroom, dimly

lit, a long ghostly series of empty tables and long win-
dows blocked with snow. Through dinner he told Ger-
trude about his plans to form an agency of his own and
said he was only waiting to find a suitable partner and
he was sure that he could make it the biggest in the coun-
try, especially with this new unexploited angle of the rela-
tions between capital and labor. “Why, I’ll be able to help
you a lot with capital and advice and all sorts of things,
once we’re married,” she said, looking at him with flushed
cheeks and sparkling eyes. “Of course you can, Gertrude.”
    She drank a great deal during dinner and wanted more
hot whiskies afterwards, and he kissed her a great deal and
ran his hand up her leg. She didn’t seem to care what
she did and kissed him right in front of the roadhouse
keeper. When they went out to get in the car to go home
the wind was blowing sixty miles an hour and the snow
had blotted out the road and Ward said it would be
suicide to try to drive to Pittsburgh a night like that and
the roadhouse keeper said that he had a room all ready
for them and that monsieur et madame would be mad to
         258

276
start out, particularly as they’d have the wind in thcii
faces all the way. At that Gertrude had a moment of panic
and said she’d rather kill herself than stay. Then she
suddenly crumpled up in Ward’s arms sobbing hysteri-
cally, want to stay, I want to stay, I love you so.”
   They called up the Staple house and talked to the night-
nurse who said that Mrs. Staple was resting more easily,
that she’d been given an opiate and was sleeping quietlj'

as a child, and Gertrude told her that when her mothei
woke to tell her she was spending the night with her
friend Jane English and that she’d be home as soon as the
blizzard let them get a car on the road. Then she called
up Jane English and told her that she was distracted with
grief and had taken a room at the Fort Pitt to be alone.
And if her mother called to tell her she was asleep. Then
they called up the Fort Pitt and reserved a room in her
name. Then they went up to bed. Ward was very happy
and decided he loved her very much and she seemed to
have done this sort of thing before because the first thing
she said was: ^We don’t want to make this a shotgun
wedding, do we, darling^”
    Six months later they were married, and Ward re-
signed his position with the information bureau. He’d
had a streak of luck on the Street and decided to take a
year off for a honeymoon in Europe. It turned out that
the Staple fortune was all left to Mrs. Staple in trus(
and that Gertrude would only have an annuity of fifteen
 thousand until her mother died, but they were planning
 to meet the old lady at Carlsbad and hoped to coax some
 capital out of her for the new advertising agency. They
 sailed in the bridal suite on the Deutschlmd to Plymouth
 and had a fine passage and Ward was only seasick one day.

277
                            THE CAMERA EYE (21)


        that August it never rained a drop and it had hardly

wined in July         the truck garden was in a terrible state

and all through the Northern Neck o£ Virginia it was

no use pulling comfodder because the lower leaves were

all withered and curled up at the edges           only the to-

matoes gave a crop

       when they weren’t using Rattler on the farm you’d

ride him (he was a gelding sorrel threeyear old and stum-

bled) through the tail woods of white pine and the sand-

bed roads on fire with trumpetvine and through swamps

dry and cracked crisscross like alligator hide

       past the Morris’s house where all the Morris chil-

dren looked dry and dusty and brown

       and round along the rivershore past Harmony Hall

where Sydnor a big sixfoot-six barefoot man with a long

face and a long nose with a big wart on his nose ’ud be

ashamblin’ around and not knowin’ what to do on account

of the drought and his wife sick and ready to have an-

other baby and the children with hoopin’ cough and his

rtomach trouble

       and past Sandy Pint agin past the big pine

       and Miss Emily ’ud be alookin’ over the fence

istandin’ beside the crapemyrtle (Miss Emily wore poke

Sonnets and always had a few flowers and a couple of

        a6o

278
broilers for sale and the best blood in the south flowed

in her veins Tancheford thads how we spell it but we pro-

nounce it Tofford if only the boys warnt so so noaccount

always drinkin’ an’ carryin’ on down by the rivershoa

an’ runnin’ whisky over from Mar’land instead o’ fishin’

an’ agoin’ out blind drunk and gettin’ the trapnets cut

up or lost         Miss Emily took a drop herself now and

then but she always put a good face on things lookin’

over the picket fence astandin’ by the crapemyrtle bush

\isitin’ with the people passin’ along the road)

        then down to Lynch’s Pint where old Bowie Frank-

lin was (he warn’t much account neither looked like a

bantam rooster Bowie Franklin did with his long scrawny

neck an’ his ruptured walk couldn’t do much work and he

didn’t have money to spend on liquor so he just fed his

gray fowls that warn’t much account and looked just like

Bowie did and hung round the wharf and sometimes

 when the boat was in or there were some fisherman in the

 crick on account of it blowin’ so hard down the bay some-

 body’d slip him a drink o’ whisky an’ he’d be a whole

 lay asleepin’ it off)

         Rattler sweat somethin’ awful on account o’ bein’ fed

 coit] in this hot weather and the old saddle stank and

 the horsedoctors buzzed round his flanks and it was time

  for supper and you’d ride slowly home hating the god-

 dam exhausted land and the drought that wouldn’t let

 the garden grow and the katydids and the dryflies jeering

                                                                               261

279
out of the sapling gums and persimmons ghostly with

dust along the road and the sickleshaped beach where the

seanettles stung you when you tried to swim out and

the chiggers and the little scraps of talk about what was

going on up to the Hague or Warsaw or Pekatone and

the phone down at the cottage that kept ringing when-

ever any farmer’s wife along the line took up the receiver

to talk to any other farmer’s wife and all down the line

you could hear the receivers click as they all ran to the

receiver to listen to what was said

       and the land between the rivers was flat drained of

all strength by tobacco in the early Walter Raleigh Cap-

tain John Smith Pocahontas days but what was it before

the war that drained out the men and women?

       and I rode Rattler the threeyearold sorrel gelding

who stumbled so much and I hated the suncaked hard-

pan and the clay subsoil and the soughing pines and the

noaccount gums and persimmonbushes and the brambles

        there was only the bay you could like sparkling to the

horizon and the southeast wind that freshened every

afternoon and the white sails of bugeyes




                                                    NEWSREEL XV


        lights go out as Borne Sweet Home is played to patrons
 Ww wages cause unrest, woman says
         262

280
                 There^s a girt in the heart of Maryland-
                 With a heart that belongs to me
                   WANT BIG WAR OR NONE

        the mannequin who is such a feature of the Paris race^
course surpasses herself in the launching of novelties. She
will put on the most amazing costume and carry it with per*

feet sangfroid. Inconsistency is her watchword
        Three German staff officers who passed nearby were
nearly mobbed by enthusiastic people who insisted on shaking

their hands

                Girl Steps On Match; Dress Ignited; Dies

                      And Maryland
                          Was fairy-land
                      When she said that mine she^d be

                DANUBE SHOTS SIGNAL FOR EARLY STRIFE

         Fm against capital punishment as are all levelmmded
women. I hate to think any woman would attend a hanging

It is a terrible thing for the state to commit murder

         CZAR LOSES PATIENCE WITH AUSTRIA

         panic m exodus from Carlsbad disappearance of Major

 reveals long series of assassinations decollete in broad daylight

 lingerie frocks that by no possible means could be associated

 with the tub What shall be worn next? Pans cries choirboys

 go camping professor to tour woods Belgrade Falls

                             GENERAL WAR NEAR

            ASSASSIN SLAYS DEPUTY JAURES

          LIVES TWO HOURS AFTER HE’S DEAD

          I lost a friend and a pal when Garros gave up his life

  out I expect to lose more friends in the profession before this

  war is over

                        LOST TRUNKS SHOW UP IN LONDON

281
       conventions of one sort or another are inevitably side-
stepped or trod upon during the languid or restful days of
summer, and because of the relaxation just now there are
several members of the younger set whose debutante days he

in the distance of two or even three seasons hence enjoying
the glory of
                     BLACK POPE ALSO DEAD

       large quantities of Virginia tobacco to be imported to
England especially for the use of British troops on the con-
tinent

               There^s a girl in the heart of Maryland
               With a heart that belongs to me



                                         PRINCE OF PEACE


        Andrew Carnegie
        was born in Dunfermline in Scotland,
        came over to the States in an immigrant
        ship worked as bobbinboy in a textile factory
        fired boilers
        clerked in a bobbin factory at $2.50 a week
        ran round Philadelphia with telegrams as a West-
ern Union messenger
        learned the Morse code was telegraph operator
on the Pennsy lines
        was a military telegraph operator in the Civil War
end



        always saved his pay;
        whenever he had a dollar he invested it.
        Andrew Carnegie started out buying Adams Ex-
press and Pullman stock when they were in a slump;
        264

282
        he had confidence in railroads,
        he had confidence in communications,
        he had confidence in transportation,
        he believed in iron.
        Andrew Carnegie believed in iron, built bridges.;
Bessemer plants blast furnaces rolling mills j
        Andrew Carnegie believed in oil;
        Andrew Carnegie believed in steel;
        always saved his money
        whenever he had a million dollars he Invested it,
        Andrew Carnegie became the richest man in the
world
                                                                             and died.
Bessemer Duquesne Rankin Pittsburgh Bethlehem Gai-j'
        Andrew Carnegie gave millions for peace
        and libraries and scientific institutes and endow-
ments and thrift
        whenever he made a billion dollars he endowed
an institution to promote universal peace
        always
        except in time of war.



                             THE CAMERA EYE (22)


        all week the fog clung to the sea and the cliffs         at

 noon there was just enough warmth of the sun through

 the fog to keep the salt cod drying on the flakes         gray

 flakes green sea gray houses white fog        at noon there

 was just enough sun to ripen bakeapple and wildpear on

 the moorlands to warm the bayberry and sweetfern

                                                                               26s

283
raealtimes in the boardinghouse everybody waited for

the radio operators        the radio operators could hardly

eat       yes it was war

       Will we go in? will Britain go in?

       Obligations according to the treaty of .. . handed

the ambassador his fassforts       every morning they put

out the cod on the flakes spreading them even in the faint

glow of the sun through the fog

       a steamer blowing in the distance the lap of the

waves against piles along the seaweedy rocks scream of

gulls clatter of boardinghouse dishes

        War declared exfedit . .  Big battle in the North

Sea German Fleet Destroyed BRITISH FLEET DE-
STROYED GERMAN SQUADRON OFF CAPE
RACE loyal Newfoundlcmders to the colors Port closed

at St, Johns Port aux Basques

        and every evening they brought in the cod off the

flakes clatter of boardinghouse dishes and everybody wait-

ing for the radio operators

        lap of the waves against the piles of the wharf^

scream of gulls circling and swooping white in the white

fog a steamer blowing in the distance and every morn-

ing they spread out the cod on the flakes






         2,66

284
                          J. WARD MOOREHOUSE


   When Ward came back from his second honeymoon
abroad he was thirtytwo, but he looked older. He had
the capital and the connections and felt that the big mo-
ment had come. The war talk in July had decided him to
cut short his trip. In London heki picked up a young man
named Edgar Robbins who was in Europe for Interna-
tional News. Edgar Robbins drank too much and was a
fool about the women, but Ward and Gertrude took him
around with them everywhere and confided in each other
that they wanted to straighten him out. Then one day
Robbins took Ward aside and said that he had syphilis
and would have to follow the straight and narrow. Ward
thought the matter over a little and offered him a job in
the New York office that he was going to open as soon as
he got home. They told Gertrude it was liver trouble
and she scolded him like a child when he took a drink and
on the boat back to America they felt he was completely
devoted to both of them. Ward didnT have to write any
copy after that and could put in all his time organizing
the business. Old Mrs. Staple had been induced to put

 fifty thousand dollars into the firm. Ward rented an

 office at 100 Fifth Avenue, fitted it up with Chinese porce-

 lain vases and cloisonne ashtrays from Vantine’s and had

 a tigerskin rug in his private office. He served tea in the
 English style every afternoon and put himself in the tele-
                                Ward Moorehouse, Public Relations
 phone book as J.
 Counsel. While Robbins was drafting the literature to be

 sent out, Ward went to Pittsburgh and Chicago and
 Bethlehem and Philadelphia to re^tablish contacts.

     In Philadelphia he was walking into the lobby of the

 Bellevue Stratford when he met Annabelle Marie. She

 greeted him amiably and said she^d heard of him and his

 publicity business and they had dinner together, talking

                                                                                267

285
About old times. “You certainly have improved,” Anna-
belle Marie kept saying. Ward could see that she re-
gretted the divorce a little but he felt he couldn’t say the
same for her. The lines on her face had deepened and
she didn’t finish her sentences, and had a parrot screech

to her voice. She was tremendously made up and he
wondered if she took drugs. She was busy divorcing Beale
who she said had turned* homosexual on her. Ward said
dryly that he had married again and was very happy.
“Who wouldn’t be with the Staple fortune back of them?”
she said. Her little air of ownership irritated Ward and
he excused himself right after dinner, saying he had work
to do. Annabelle looked at him through halfclosed eyes
with her head to one side, said “I wish you luck,” and
went up in the hotel elevator in a shrill cackle of laughter.
    Next day he took the Pennsylvania to Chicago, travel-
ing in a drawing room. Miss Rosenthal, his secretary,
and Morton, his English valet, went with him. He had
his dinner in the drawing room with Miss Rosenthal, a
sallowfaced girl, shrewd and plain, who he felt was de-
voted to his interests. She had been with him in Pitts-
burgh with Bessemer Products. When the coffee had been
cleared away and Morton had poured them each out a
swallow of brandy that Miss Rosenthal giggled over a
great deal declaring it would go to her head, he started
to dictate. The train rumbled and lurched and now and
then he could smell coalsmoke and the hot steamygreasy
body of the engine up ahead, hot shiny steel charging
throught the dark Appalachians. He had to talk loudly to
be heard. The rumble of the train made the cords of his
voice vibrate. He forgot everything in his own words

. . . American industry like a steamengine, like a high-
power locomotive on a great express train charging
through the night of old individualistic methods. . . .
What does a steamengine require? Cooperation, coordi-
         268

286
nation o£ the inventor’s brain, the promoter’s brain thax
made the development of these highpower products pos-
sible , . . Coordination of capital, the storedup energy
of the race in the form of credit intelligently directed

. . , labor, the prosperous contented American working
man to whom the unprecedented possibilities of capital
collected in great corporations had given the full dinner-
pail, cheap motor transport, insurance, short working hours

. . . a measure of comfort and prosperity unequaled be-
fore or since in the tragic procession of recorded history
or in the known regions of the habitable globe.
    But he had to stop dictating because he found he’d
lost his voice. He sent Miss Rosenthal to bed and went
to bed himself, but he couldn’t sleep; words, ideas, plans,
stockquotations kept unrolling in endless tickertape in his
nead.
    Next afternoon at the LaSalle he had a call from
Judge Bowie C. Planet, Ward sat waiting for him to
come up, looking out at the very pale blue Lake Michi-
gan sky. In his hand he had a little filing card on which
was written:

         Planet, Bov/ie C     .  . . Tennessee Judge, married Elsie
Wilson Denver; small copper lead interests.      ,  .   . Anaconda?
unlucky oil speculator .    .   . member one-horse lawfirm Planet
and Wilson, Springfield, Illinois

    ^^All right, Miss Rosenthal,” he said when there was
a knock at the door. She went off into the other room
with the filing card.
     Morton opened the door to let in a roundfaced man
with a black felt hat and a cigar.

     ^^Hello, judge,” Ward said, getting to his feet and
holding out his hand. ^^How’s everything? Won’t you sit
down?” Judge Planet advanced slowly into the room
He had a curious rolling gait as if his feet hurt him.
They shook hands, and Judge Planet found himself sit

                                                                                        269

287
ting facing the steelbriglit light that came through the
big windows back of Moorehouse’s desk.
    “Won^t you have a cup of tea, sir?” asked Morton,
who advanced slowly with a tray glittering with silver
teathings. The judge was so surpnsed that he let the
long ash that he^d been carrying on his cigar to prove
to himself he was sober drop off on his bulging vest.
The judge’s face remained round and bland. It was the
face of a mucker from which all the lines of muckerdom
had been carefully massaged away. The judge found him-
self sipping a cup of lukewarm tea with milk in it.

    ‘^Clears the head, judge, clears the head,” said Ward,
whose cup was cooling untasted before him.
    Judge Planet puffed silently on his cigar.
    “Well, sir,” he said, “Pm very glad to see you.’*^
    At that moment Morton announced Mr. Barrow, a
skinny man with popeyes and a big adamsapple above a
stringy necktie. He had a nervous manner of speaking
and smoked too many cigarettes. He had the look of being
stained with nicotine all over, face, fingers, teeth yellow.
    On Ward’s desk there was another little filing card
that read:

        Barrow, G. H., labor connections, reformer type. Once
sec. Bro. locomotive engineers; unreliable.

    As he got to his feet he turned the card over. After
he’d shaken hands with Mr. Barrow, placed him facing
the light and encumbered him with a cup of tea, he began
to talk.
    “Capital and labor,” he began in a slow careful voice
is if dictating, “as you must have noticed, gentlemen, m
the course of your varied and useful careers, capital and
labor, those two great forces of our national life neither
of which can exist without the other are growing further
and further apart; any cursory glance at the newspapers
 will tell you that. Well, it has occurred to me that one
         270

288
reason for this unfortunate state of affairs has been the
lack of any private agency that might fairly present the
situation to the public. The lack of properly distributed
information is the cause of most of the misunderstandings
in this world . .     . The great leaders of American capital,
as you probably realize, Mr. Barrow, are firm believers
in fairplay and democracy and are only too anxious to
give the worker his share of the proceeds of industry if
they can only see their way to do so in fairness to the
public and the investor. After all, the public is the in-
vestor whom we all aim to serve.”
    ^^Sometimes,” said Mr. Barrow, “but hardly       . .
    “Perhaps you gentlemen would have a whisky and
soda.” Morton stood sleekhaired between them with a
tray on which were decanters, tall glasses full of ice and
some open splits of Apollinaris.
    “I don’t mind if I do,” said Judge Planet.
    Morton padded out, leaving them each with a clinking
glass. Outside the sky was beginning to glow with evening
a little. The air was winecolored in the room. The glasses
made things chattier. The judge chewed on the end of a
fresh cigar.
    “Now, let’s see if Pm getting you right, Mr. Moore-
house. You feel that with your connections with advertis-
ing and big business you want to open up a new field in
the shape of an agency to peaceably and in a friendlj?’
fashion settle labor disputes. Just how would you go
about it?”
    “I am sure that organized labor would cooperate in
such a movement,” said G. H. Barrow, leaning forward
on the edge of his chair. “If only they could be sure that

.  . . well, that . . .”
    “That they weren’t getting the wool pulled over their

 eyes,” said the judge, laughing.
    “Exactly.”
     “Well, gentlemen, I’m going to put my cards right

                                                                               271

289
down an the table. The great motto upon which I have
built up my business has always been cooperation.”
          certainly agree with you there/’ said the judge^
laughing again and slapping his knee. ^^The difficult ques-
tion is how to bring about that happy state.”
    “Well, the first step is to establish contact . .       . Right
at this moment under our very eyes we see friendly contact
being established.”
    “I must admit,” said G. H. Barrow with an uneasy
laugh, “I never expected to be drinking a highball with
a member of the firm of Planet and Wilson.”
    The judge slapped his fat thigh. “You mean on account
of ihe Colorado tiouble . . , ? You needn’t be afraid, I
won’t eat you, Mr. Barrow . .             . But, frankly, Mr.
Moorehouse, this doesn’t seem to me to be just the time
to launch your little project.”
    “This war in Europe    .  . began G. H. Barrow.
    “Is America’s great opportunity ... You know the
proverb about when thieves fall out ... Just at present
I admit we find ourselves in a moment of doubt and
despair, but as soon as American business recovers from
the first shock and begins to pull itself together . . .
                                                                                my wife
Why, gentlemen, I just came back from Europe 5
and I sailed the day Great Britain declared war ... I
can tell you it was a narrow squeak ... Of one thing I
can assure you with comparative certainty, whoever wins,
Europe will be economically ruined. This war is America’s
great opportunity. The very fact of our neutrality . . .”

“I don’t see who will be benefited outside of the muni-
tionsmakers,” said G. H. Barrow.
    Ward talked a long time, and then looked at his watch,
that lay on the desk before him, and got to his feet. “Gen-
tlemen, I’m afraid you’ll have to excuse me. I have just
 time to dress for dinner.” Morton was already standing
 beside the desk with their hats. It had gotten dark in the
 room. “Lights, please, Morton,” snapped Ward, As they

290
v^^ent out Judge Planet said^ ^Well, iPs been a very pleas
ant chat, Mr, Moorehouse, but I^m afraid your schemes
are a little idealistic.” “IVe rarely heard a business man
speak with such sympathy and understanding of the laboi
situation,” said G. H. Barrow. “I only voice the senti-
ments of my clients,” said Ward as he bowed them out
    Next day he spoke at a Rotary Club luncheon on ^‘^Laboi
Troubles: A Way Out.” He sat at a long table in th^
big hotel banquet hall full of smells of food and cigarettes,
and scurrying waiters. He spread the food a little round
his plate with a fork, answering when he was spoken to,
joking a little with Judge Planet, who sat opposite him,
trying to formulate sentences out of the haze of phrases
in hi3 mind. At last it was time for him to get to his feet.
He stood at the end of the long table with a cigar in his
hand, looking at the two rows of heavyjowled faces turned
towards him.
    “When I was a boy down along the Delaware ,          .
He stopped. A tremendous clatter of dishes was coming
from behind the swinging doors through which waiters
were still scuttling with trays. The man who had gone to
the door to make them keep quiet came stealthily back.
You could hear his shoes creak across the parquet floor.
Men leaned forward along the table. Ward started off
                                                    he hardly knew what he
again. He was going on now 5
was saying, but he had raised a laugh out of them. The
tension relaxed. “American business has been slow to take
advantage of the possibilities of modern publicity . . ,
education of the public and of employers and employees,

all equally servants of the public . , . Cooperation . . .

stockownership giving the employee an Interest in the im
dustry . .    . avoiding the grave dangers of socialism and
demagoguery and worse ... It is in such a situation that

the public relations counsel can step in in a quiet manlj
way and say. Look here, men, let’s talk this over eye

to eye . . . But his main importance is in times of in-

                                                                               ^73

291
 dustrial peace . . . when two men are sore and just about
to hit one another is no time to preach public service to
them . . . The time for an educational campaign and an
oral crusade that will drive home to the rank and file of
the mighty colossus of American uptodate industry is
right now, today.”
     There was a great deal of clapping. He sat down and
sought out Judge Planet’s face with his blue-eyed smile.
Judge Planet looked impressed.



                                                        NEWSREEL XVI


         the Philadelphian had completed the thirteenth lap and
was two miles away on the fourteenth. His speed it is
thought must have been between a hundred and a hundred
and ten miles an hour. His car wavered for a flash and then
careered to the left. It struck a slight elevation and Jumped
When the car alighted it was on four wheels atop of a high
embankment. Its rush apparently was unimpeded. Wishart
turned the car off the embankment and attempted to regain
the road. The speed would not permit the slight turn neces-
sary, however, and the car plowed through the frontyard
of a farmer residing on the course. He escaped one tree but
was brought up sideways against another. The legs being
impeded by the steering gear they were torn from the trunk
ts he was thrown through

             1 want to go
                 To Mexico
             Under the stars and strifes to fight the joe

                             SNAPS CAMERA; ENDS LIFE

         gay little chairs and tables stand forlornly on the side-
walk for there are few people feeling rich enough to take
even a small drink

         274

292
                  PLUMBER HAS 100 LOVES
                     BRINGS MONKEYS HOME

       missing rector located losses in U S crop report let baby
go naked if you want it to be healthy if this mystery is ever
solved you will £nd a woman at the bottom of the mystery
said Patrolman E. B. Garfinkle events leading up to the
present war run continuously back to the French P.evolution

                    UNIVERSITY EXPELS GUM

       they seemed to stagger like drunken men suddenly hit
between the eyes after which they made a run for us shout-
ing some outlandish cry we could not make out

                       And the ladies of the harem
                       Knew exactly how to wear ^em
                       In oriental Baghdad long ago.



                            THE CAMERA EYE (23)


        this friend of mother’s was a very lovely woman with

lovely blond hair and she had two Im^ely daughters

the blond one married an oil man who was bald as the

palm of your hand and went to live in Sumatra               the

dark one married a man from Bogota and it was a long

trip in a dugout canoe up the Magdalena River and the

natives were Indians and slept in hammocks and had

such horrible diseases and when the woman had a baby

it was the husband who went to bed and used poisoned

arrows and if you got a wound in that country it never

 healed but festered white and maturated and the dv^out

293
tipped over so easily into the warm steamy water full of

ravenous fish that if you had a scratch on you or an un-

healed wound it was the smell of blood attracted them

sometinxes they tore people to pieces

        it was eight weeks up the Magdalena River in dug-

out canoes and then you got to Bogota

        poor Jonas Fenimore came home from Bogota a

very sick man and they said it was elephantiasis             he

was a good fellow and told stories about the steamy jungle

and the thunderstorms and the crocodiles and the hor-

rible diseases and the ravenous fish and he drank up all

the whisky in the sideboard and when he went in swim-

ming you could see that there were brown thick blotches

on his legs like the scale on an apple and he liked to

drink whisky and he talked about Colombia becoming

one of the richest countries in the world and oil and rare

Woods for veneering and tropical butterflies

        but the trip up the Magdalena River was too long

and too hot and too dangerous and he died

        they said it was whisky and elephantiasis

                                               and the Magdalena River



                                ELEANOR STODDARD


     When they first arrived in New York, Eleanor, who’d
 never been East before, had to rely on Eveline for every-
         276

294
thing. Freddy met them at the train and took them to get
rooms at the Brevoort. He said it was a little far from
the theater but much more interesting than an uptown
hotel, all the artists and radicals and really interesting
people stayed there and it was very French. Going down
in the taxi he chattered about the lovely magnificent play
and his grand part, and what a fool the director Ben
Freelby was, and how one of the backers had only put up
half the money he’d promised, but that Josephine Gil-
christ, the business manager, had the sum virtually lined
up now and the Shuberts were interested and they would
open out of town at Greenwich exactly a month from
today. Eleanor looked out at Fifth Avenue and the chilly
Spring wind blowing women’s skirts, a man chasing a
derby hat, the green buses, taxicabs, the shine on shop-
                after all, this wasn’t so very different from Chi-
windows j
cago. But at lunch at the Brevoort it was very different,
Freddy seemed to know so many people and introduced
them to everybody as if he was very proud of them. They
were all names she had heard or read of in the book
column of The Daily News, Everybody seemed very
friendly. Freddy talked French to the waiter and the hoF
landaise sauce was the most delicious she had ever eaten.
    That afternoon on the way to rehearsal, Eleanor had
her first glimpse of Times Square out of the taxicab
window. In the dark theater they found the company
sitting waiting for Mr. Freelby. It was very mysterious,
with just a single big electric light bulb hanging over the
stage and the set for some other play looking all flat and
dusty.
    A grayhaired man with a broad sad face and big circles
under his eyes came in. That was the famous Benjamin
Freelbyj he had a tired fatherly manner and asked
Eveline and Eleanor up to his apartment to dinner with
Freddy that night so that they could talk at their ease
about the settings and the costumes. Eleanor was relieved

                                                                               277

295
that he was so kind and tired and thought that after all

she and Eveline were much better dressed than any of
those New York actresses. Mr. Freelby made a great fuss
about there being no lights, did they expect him to re-
hearse in the dark? The stagemanager with the manu-

script in his hand ran round looking for the electrician
and s'^rnebody was sent to call up the office. Mr. Freelby
walked about the stage and fretted and fumed and said,
^^This IS monstrous.” When the electrician arrived wiping
his mouth with the back of his hand, and finally switched
on the houselights and some spots, Mr. Freelby had to
have a table and chair and a reading light on the table.
Nobody seemed to be able to find a chair the right height
for him. He kept fuming up and down, tugging at his
coarse gray hair and saying, ^^This is monstrous.” At last
he got settled and he said to Mr. Stein, the stagemanager,
a lanky man who sat in another chair near him, “Wedl
start with act one, Mr. Stem. Has everybody their parts
Several actors got on the stage and stood around and
the rest talked in low voices. Mr. Freelby “shushed” them
and said, “Please, children, we’ve got to be quiet,” and
the rehearsal was in progress.
    From that time on everything was a terrible rush.
Eleanor never seemed to get to bed. The scenepamter,
 Mr. Bridgeman, at whose studios the scenery was painted

                                                     it turned out that some-
found objections to everything 3
one else, a pale young man with glasses who worked for
 Mr. Bridgeman would have to design the scenery from
their sketches and that they couldn’t have their names in
 ^ne program at all except for the costumes on account of
 not belonging to the scene designers’ union. When they
 weren’t wrangling at the Bridgeman Studios they were
 dashing about the streets in taxicabs with samples of ma-
 terials. They never seemed to get to bed before four or
 five in the morning. Everybody was so temperamental and
         278

296
Eleanor had quite a siege each week to get a check out
of Miss Gilchrist.
    When the costumes were ready, all in early Victorian
style, and Eleanor and Freddy and Mr. Freelby went to
see them at the costumers’ they really looked lovely but
the costumers wouldn’t deliver them without a check and
nobody could find Miss Gilchrist and everybody was run-
ning round in taxis and at last late that night Mr. Freelby
said he’d give his personal check. The transfer company
had its trucks at the door with the scenery but wouldn’t
let the flats be carried into the theater until they had a
check. Mr. Bridgeman was there, too, saying his check
had come back marked no funds and he and Mr. Freelby
had words in the boxoffice. At last Josephine Gilchrist
appeared in a taxi with five hundred dollars in bills on
account for Mr. Bridgeman and for the transfer company.
Everybody smiled when they saw the crisp orangebacked

bills. It was a great relief.
   When they had made sure that the scenery was going
into the theater, Eleanor and Eveline and Freddy Sear-
geant and Josephine Gilchrist and Mr. Freelby all went
to Bustanoby’s to get a bite to eat and Mr. Freelby set
them up to a couple of bottles of Pol Roger and Josephine
Gilchrist said that she felt it in her bones that the play
would be a hit and that didn’t often happen with her,
and Freddy said the stagehands liked it and that was
always a good sign and Mr. Freelby said Ike Gold, the
Shuberts’ officeboy, had sat through the run-through with
the tears running down his cheeks, but nobody knew what
theater they’d open in after a week in Greenwich and
a week in Hartford and Mr. Freelby said he’d go and
talk to J. J. about it personally first thing in the morning.
   Friends from Chicago called up who wanted to get
into the dress rehearsal. It made Eleanor feel quite im-
portant, especially when Sally Emerson called up. The
dress rehearsal dragged terribly, half the scenery hadn’t

                                                                              279

297
come and the Wessex villagers didn^t have any costumes,
but everybody said that it was a good sign to have a bad
dress rehearsal.
    Opening night Eleanor didn^t get any supper and had
only a half an hour to dress in. She was icy all over with
excitement. She hoped the new chartreuse tulle evening
dress she’d charged at Tappe’s looked well but she didn’t
have time to worry. She drank a cup of black coffee and

it seemed as if the taxi never would get uptown. When
she got to the theater the lobby was all lit up and full
of silk hats and bare powdered backs and diamonds and
eveningwraps and all the firstnighters looked at each other
and waved to their friends and talked about who was
there and kept trooping up the aisle half way through the

first act. Eleanor and Eveline stood stiffly side by side in
the back of the theater and nudged each other when a
costume looked good and agreed that the actors were too
dreadful and that Freddy Seargeant was the worst. At
the party that Sally Emerson gave for them afterwards
at the duplex apartment of her friends the Careys every-
body said that the scenery and costumes were lovely and
that they were sure the play would be a great success.
Eleanor and Eveline were the center of everything and
Eleanor was annoyed because Eveline drank a little too
 much and was noisy. Eleanor met a great many interest-
 ing people and decided that she’d stay on in New York
whatever happened.
     The play failed after two weeks and Eleanor and
 Eveline never did get seven hundred and fifty dollars
 Aat the management owed them. Eveline went back to
 Chicago, and Eleanor rented an apartment on Eighth
 Street. Sally Emerson had decided that Eleanor had great
 talent and got her husband to put up a thousand dollars
 to start her New York decorating business on. Eveline
 Hutchins’ father was sick, but she wrote from Chicago
 that she’d be on whenever she could.

298
   While Sally Emerson was m New Tork that summer
Eleanor went out with her all the time and got to know
many rich people. It was through Alexander Parsons that
                                                                      Ward Moore-
she got the job to decorate the house the J.
houses were building near Great Neck. Mrs. Moorehouse
walked round the unfinished house with her. She was a
washedout blonde who kept explaining that sheM do the
decorating herself only she hadn^t the strength since her
operation. She’d been in bed most of the time since her
second child was born and told Eleanor all about her
operation. Eleanor hated to hear about women’s com-
plaints and nodded coldly from time to time, making
businesslike comments about furniture and draperies and
now and then jotting notes on the decoration down on a
piece of paper. Mrs. Moorehouse asked her to stay to
lunch in the little cottage where they were living until
they got the house finished. The little cottage was a large
house in Dutch Colonial style full of pekinese dogs and
maids in flounced aprons and a butler. As they went Into
the diningroom Eleanor heard a man’s voice In an ad-
joining room and smelt cigarsmoke. At lunch she was
introduced to Mr. Moorehouse and a Mr. Perry. They
had been playing golf and were talking about Tampico
and oilwells. Mr. Moorehouse offered to drive her back
to town after lunch and she was relieved to get away from
Mrs. Moorehouse. She hadn’t had a chance to talk about
her ideas for decorating the new house yet, but, going in,
Mr. Moorehouse asked her many questions about it and
they laughed together about how ugly most people’s
houses were, and Eleanor thought that it was very Inter-
esting to find a business man who cared about those things.
Mr. Moorehouse suggested that she prepare the estimates
and bring them to his office. ^^How will Thursday doV
Thursday would be fine and he had no date that day and
they’d have a bite of lunch together if she cared to.
 ^^Mealtime’s the only time I get to devote to the things

                                                                               a8i

299
of the spirit,” he said with a blue twinkle in his eye, so
they both said “Thursday” again when he let Eleanor
out at the corner of Eighth Street and Fifth Avenue and
Eleanor thought he looked as if he had a sense of humor
md thought she liked him much better than Tom Custis.
    Eleanor found that she had to have many interviews
with Ward Moorehouse as the work went on. She had
him to dinner at her place on Eighth Street and she had
her Martinique maid Augustine cook saute chicken with
red peppers and tomatoes. They had cocktails with ab-
sinthe in them and a bottle of very good burgundy and
Ward Moorehouse enjoyed sitting back on the sofa and
talking and she enjoyed listening and began to call him
     W. After that they were friends quite apart from the
J.
work on the house at Great Neck.
    He told Eleanor about how he^d been a boy in Wil-
mington, Delaware, and the day the militia fired on the
old darkey and thought it was the Spanish fleet and about
his unhappy first marriage and about how his second wife
was an invalid and about his work as a newspaperman
and in advertising offices, and Eleanor, in a gray dress
with just a touch of sparkly something on one shoulder
and acting the discreet little homebody, led him on to
explain about the work he was doing keeping the public
informed about the state of relations between capital and
labor and stemming the propaganda of sentimentalists
and reformers, upholding American ideas against crazy
German socialistic ideas and the panaceas of discontented
dirtfarmers in the Northwest. Eleanor thought his ideas
were very interesting, but she liked better to hear about
the stockexchange and how the Steel Corporation was
founded and the difficulties of the oil companies in Mex-
ico, and Hearst and great fortunes. She asked him about
some small investment she was making, and he looked up
at her with twinkly blue eyes in a white square face where
 prosperity was just beginning to curve over the square-
         282

300
ness of the jowl and said, “Miss Stoddard, may I have
the honor of being your financial adviser?”
   Eleanor thought his slight southern accent and old-
school gentlemanly manners very attractive. She wished
she had a more distinctivelookmg apartment snd that
she^ kept some of the crystal chandeliers instead of sell-
ing them. It was twelve o^clcck before he left, saying he^d
had a very pleasant evening but that he must go to answer
some longdistance calls. Eleanor sat before the mirror
at her dressingtable rubbing cold cream on her fao. by the
light of two candles. She wished her neck wasn^t so
scrawny and wondered how it would be to start getting
a henna rinse now and then when she got her hair washed.



                            THE CAMERA EYE (24)


        raining in historic Quebec         it was raining on the

Chateau in historic Quebec where gallant Wolfe in ^

threecornered hat sat in a boat in a lithograph and read

Gray’s “Elegy” to his men gallant Wolfe climbing up the

cliffs to meet gallant Montcalm in a threecornered hat on

the plains of Abraham with elaborate bows and lace ruffles

on the uniforms in the hollow squares and the gallantry

and the command to fire and the lace ruffles rumed in

the mud on the plains of Abraham

        but the Chateau was the Chateau Frontenac worid-

 famous hostelry historic in the gray rain in historic gray

 Quebec and we were climbing up from the Saguenay River

 Scenic Steamer Greatest Scenic Route in the World the

                                                                                28j

301
Chautauqua JLecturer and his wife and the baritone from

Athens Kentucky where they have a hill called the Acrop-

olis exactly the way it is in Athens Greece and culture

and a reproduction of the Parthenon exactly the way it

is in Athens Greece

        stony rain on stony streets and out onto the platform

and the St. Lawrence people with umbrellas up walking

back and forth on the broad wooden rainy platform look-

ing over the slatepointed roofs of Quebec and the coal-

wharves and the grainelevators and the ferries and the

Emfress of Ireland with creamcolored funnels steam-

ing in from the Other Side and Levis and green hills

across the river and the Isle of Orleans green against

green and the stony rain on the shining gray slatepointed

roofs of Quebec

        but the Chautauqua Lecturer wants his dinner and

quarrels with his wife and makes a scene in the historic

diningroom of the historic Chateau Frontenac and the

headwaiter comes and the Chautauqua Lecturer’s a big

thick curlyhaired angry man with a voice used to bawling

 in tents about the Acropolis just like it is in Athens Greece

 and the Parthenon just like it is In Athens Greece and the
 Winged Victory and the baritone is too attentive to the

 umall boy who wants to get away and wishes he hadn’t

 said he’d come and wants to shake the whole bunch

        but it’s raining in historic Quebec and walking down

 the street alone with the baritone he kept saying about

         284

302
how there were bad girls in a town like this and boys

shouldn’t go with bad girls and the Acropolis and the

bel canto and the Parthenon and voice culture and the

beautiful statues of Greek boys and the Winged Victory

and the beautiful statues

       but I finally shook him and went out on the cars

to see the falls of Montmorency famous in song and

story and a church full of crutches left by the sick in St*

Anne de Beaupre

        and the gray rainy streets full of girls




                                                                           JANEY


    In the second year of the European War Mr. Carroll
sold out his interest in the firm of Dreyfus and Carroll
to Mr. Dreyfus and went home to Baltimore. There was
a chance that the state Democratic convention would
nominate him for Governor. Janey missed him in the office
and followed all the reports of Maryland politics with
great interest. When Mr. Carroll didn’t get the nomina-
tion Janey felt quite sorry about it. Round the office there
got to be more and more foreigners and talk there took on
a distinctly pro-German trend that she didn’t at all like*
Mr. Dreyfus was very polite and generous with his em-
ployees but Janey kept thinking of the ruthless invasion
of Belgium and the horrible atrocities and didn’t like to
be working for a Hun, so she began looking round for
another job. Business was slack in Washington and she
knew it was foolish to leave Mr. Dreyfus but she couldn’t
help it so she went to work for Smedley Richards, a real-

                                                                               285

303
estate operator on Connecticut Avenue, at a dollar less a
week. Mr, Richards was a stout man who talked a great
deal about the gentleman’s code and made love to her.
For a couple of weeks she kept him off, but the third week
he took to drinking and kept putting his big beefy hands
on her and borrowed a dollar one day and at the end of
the week said he wouldn’t be able to pay her for a day
or two, so she just didn’t go back and there she was out
of a job.
                                                            she dreaded having
    It was scary being out of a job 5
to go back to live at her mother’s with the boarders and
her sisters’ noisy ways. She read the ads in The Star and
The Post every day and answered any she saw, but some-
one had always been there ahead of her, although she
got to the address the first thing m the morning. She
even put her name down at an employment agency. The
woman at the desk was a stout woman with bad teeth and
a mean smile, she made Janey pay two dollars as a regis-
tration fee and showed her the waiting list of expert
stenographers she had and said that girls ought to marry
and that trying to earn their own living was stuff and
nonsense because it couldn’t be done. The bad air and the
pinched faces of the girls waiting on benches made her
feel quite sick so she went and sat a little while in the
sun in Lafayette Square getting her courage up to tell
Alice, who was still at Mrs. Robinson’s, that she hadn’t
found a job yet. A young man with a red face sat down
beside her and tried to start talking to her, so she had to
walk on. She went into a drugstore and had a chocolate
milk, but the sodajerker tried to kid her a little, and she
burst out crying. The sodajerker looked scared to death
and said, ^^Beg pardon, miss, I didn’t mean no offence.”
Her eyes were still red when she met Alice coming out
of the Riggs Buildings Alice insisted on paying for a
thirtyfive cent lunch for her at The Brown Teapot, al-
though Janey couldn’t eat a thing. Alice had an Itold-

         2.86

304
youso manner that made Janey mad, and she said that it
was too late now for her to try to go back to Mrs. Robin-
son^s because Mrs. Robinson didn’t have work for the
girls she had there as it was. That afternoon Janey felt
too discouraged to look for work and roamed round the
Smithsonian Institution trying to interest herself m the
specimens of Indian beadwork and war canoes and totem-
poles, but everything gave her the creeps and she went
up to the room and had a good cry. She thought of Joe
and Jerry Burnham and wondered why she never got
letters from them, and thought of the poor soldiers in
the trenches and felt very lonely. By the time Alice came
home she’d washed her face and put on powder and rouge
                                                                             she joked
and was bustling briskly about their room 5
Alice about the business depression and said that if she
couldn’t get a job in Washington she’d go to Baltimore or
New York or Chicago to get a job. Alice said that sort of
talk made her miserable. They went out and ate a ham
sandwich and a glass of milk for supper to save money.
    Ail that fall Janey went round trying to get work
She got so that the first thing she was conscious of in the
morning when she woke up was the black depression of
having nothing to do. She ate Christmas dinner with her
mother and sisters and told them that she’d been prom-
 ised twentyfive a week after the first of the year to keep
 them from sympathizing with her. She wouldn’t give
 them the satisfaction.
    At Christmas she got a torn paper package from Joe
 through the mail with an embroidered kimono in it. She
 went through the package again and again hoping to find
 a letter, but there was nothing but a little piece of paper
 with Merry Xmas scrawled on it. The package was post-
 marked St. Nazaire in France and was stamped ouvert
 PAR LA CENSURE. It made the war seem very near to her
 and she hoped Joe wasn’t in any danger over there.
     One icy afternoon in January when Janey was lying

                                                                                287

305
on the bed reading The Old Wwes^ Tde^ she heard the
voice of Mrs. Baghot, the landlady, calling her. She was
afraid it was about the rent that they hadn^t paid that
month yet, but it was Alice on the phone. Alice said for
her to come right over because there was a man calling
up who wanted a stenographer for a few days and none of
the girls were in and she thought Janey might just as
well go over and see if she wanted the job. “What’s the
address? Pll go right over.” Alice told her the address.
Her voice was stuttering excitedly at the other end of the
hne. “I’m so scared ... if Mrs. Robinson finds out she’ll
be furious.” “Don’t worry, and I’ll explain it to the
man,” said Janey.
    The man was at the Hotel Continental on Pennsyl-
vania Avenue. He had a bedroom and a parlor littered
with typewritten sheets and papercovered pamphlets. He
wore shellrimmed spectacles that he kept pulling off and
putting on as if he wasn’t sure whether he saw better
with them or without them. He started to dictate without
looking at Janey, as soon as she’d taken off her hat and
gotten pad and pencil out of her handbag. He talked in
jerks as if delivering a speech, striding back and forth on
long thin legs all the while. It was some sort of article
to be marked “For immediate release,” all about capital
and labor and the eighthour day and the Brotherhood of
Locomotive Engineers. It was with a little feeling of
 Worry that she worked out that he must be a laborleader.
 When he’d finished dictating he went out of the room
abruptly and told her please to type it out as soon as she
 could that he’d be back in a minute. There was a Reming-
ton on the table but she had to change the ribbon and
 typed in a great hurry for fear he would come back and
 find her not finished. Then she sat there waiting, with
 the article and the carbon copies all piled on the table
 looking neat and crisp. An hour passed and he didn’t
«ome. Janey got restless, roamed alxiut the room, looked
         288

306
into the pamphlets. They were all about labor and eco-
nomics and didn’t interest her. Then she looked out of
the window and tried to crane her neck out to see what
time it said by the clock on the postoiSce tower. But she
couldn’t see it, so she went over to the phone to ask the
office if Mr. Barrow was in the hotel please to tell him his
manuscript was ready. The desk said it was five o’clock and
that Mr. Barrow hadn’t come in yet, although he’d left
word that he’d be back immediately. As she set down the
receiver she knocked a letter on lavender paper off the
stand. When she picked it up, as she had nothing to do
and was tired of playing naughts and crosses with herself,
she read it. She was ashamed of herself but once she’d
started she couldn’t stop.

Dear G. H.
    I hate to do this but honestly, kid, I’m in a hell of a fix

for jack. You’ve got to come across with two thousand
iron men ($2000) or else I swear I’ll stop behaving like

a lady and raise the roof. I hate to do this but I know
you’ve got it or else I w^ouldn’t plague you like I do. 1
mean business this time
                                       —the little girl you used to love
                                                                          Queenie

    Janey blushed and put the letter back exactly the w^ay

it had been. Weren’t men awful, always some skeleton in
the closet. It was dark outside and Janey was getting
hungry and uneasy when the telephone rang. It was Mr.
Barrow, who said that he was sorry he’d kept her waiting
and that he was at the Shoreham in Mr. Moorehouse’s
suite and would she mind coming right over—no, not to
bring the manuscript—^but he had some more dictation

for her right there, J. Ward Moorehouse it was, she
must know the name. Janey didn’t know the name, but

 the idea of going to take dictation at the Shoreham quite

thrilled her and this letter and everything. This was som^

307
excitement like when she used to go round with Jerrj^
Burnham. She put on her hat and coat, freshened up her

face a little in the mirror over the mantel and walked
through the stinging January evening to the corner of F
and 14th where she stood waiting for the car. She wished
                             the lashing wind bit into her hands in
she had a muff 3
her thin gloves and into her legs just above the shoetops.
She wished she was a wealthy married woman living in
Chevy Chase and waiting for her limousine to come by
and take her home to her husband and children and a
roaring open fire. She remembered Jerry Burnham and
wondered if she could have married him if she’d handled

it right. Or Johnny Edwards^ he’d gone to New York
when she’d refused him, and was making big money in a
broker’s office. Or Morris Byer. But he was a Jew. This
year she hadn’t had any beaux. She was on the shelf; that
was about the size of it.
   At the corner before the Shoreham she got out of the
car. The lobby was warm. Welldressed people stood
around talking in welldressed voices. It smelt of hothouse
flowers. At the desk they told her to go right up to apart^
ment number eight on the first floor. A man with a wrin-
kled white face under a flat head of sleek black hair opened
the door. He wore a sleek black suit and had a discreet
skating walk. She said she was the stenographer for Mr.
Barrow and he beckoned her into the next room. She stood
at the door waiting for someone to notice her. A^ the end
of the room there was a big fireplace where two logs
blazed. In front of it was a broad table piled with maga-
zines, newspapers, and typewritten manuscripts. On one
end stood a silver teaservice, on the other a tray with
decanters, a cocktail shaker and glasses. Everything had
a wellpolished silvery gleam, chairs, tables, teaset, and
the watchchain and the teeth and sleek prematurely gray
hair of the man who stood with his back to the fire.
    Immediately she saw him Janey thought he must be
         290

308
a fine man. Mr. Barrow and a little baldheaded man sat
in deep chairs on either side of the fireplace listening to
what he said with great attention.

    ^‘^It^s a very important thing for the future of this
country/^ he was saying in a low earnest voice.                      can
assure you that the great executives and the powerful in-
terests in manufacturing and financial circles are watching
these developments with the deepest interest. Don^t quote
                     I can assure you confidentially that the Presi-
me in this 3
dent himself . . His eye caught Janey’s. “I guess this

is the stenographer. Come right in, Miss . . “Williams

is the name,” said Janey.
    His eyes were the blue of alcoholflame, with a boyisrj

                             this must be Ward Moorehouse whose
flicker in them 3                           J.
name she ought to know.

                                                                                        sit right
    “Have you a pencil and paper? ThaPs fine 3
down at the table. Morton, you^d better carry away those
teathings.” Morton made the teathings disappear noise-

lessly. Janey sat down at the end of the table and brought
out her pad and pencil. “Hadn^t you better take off your
hat and coat, or you won’t feel them when you go out?”
There was something homey in his voice, different when
he talked to her than when he talked to the men. She
wished she could work for him. Anyway she was glad she
had come.
    “Now, Mr. Barrow, what we want is a statement that

will allay unrest. We must make both sides in this com
troversy understand the value of cooperation. That’s a
great word, cooperation . . . First well get it down in
rough . . . Youll please make suggestions from the
angle of organized labor, and you, Mr. Jonas, from the

juridical angle. Ready, Miss Williams . .                . Released by
     Ward Moorehouse, Public Relations Counsel, Hotel
J.
Shoreham, Washington, D. C., Jan. 15, 1916 .            . Then
Janey was too busy taking down the dictation to catch the

sense of what was being said.

                                                                                       291

309
   That evening when she got home she found Alice al-
ready in bed. Alice wanted to go to sleep, but Janey
chattered like a magpie about Mr. Barrow and labor
                          Ward Moorehouse and what a fine man
troubles and J.
he was, and so kind and friendly and had such interesting
ideas for collaboration between capital and labor, and
spoke so familiarly about what the President thought and
what Andrew Carnegie thought and what the Rockefeller
interests or Mr. Schick or Senator LaFollette intended,
and had such handsome boyish blue eyes, and was so nice,
and the silver teaservice, and how young he looked in
spite of his prematurely gray hair, and the open fire and
the silver cocktail shaker and the crystal glasses.
   ^^Why, Janey,” broke in Alice, yawning, “I declare you
must have a crush on him. I never heard you talk about
a man that way in my life.” Janey blushed and felt very
sore at Alice. “Oh, Alice, you’re so silly . .        . It’s no use
talking to you about anything.” She got undressed and
turned out the light. It was only when she got to bed
that she remembered that she hadn’t had any supper.
She didn’t say anything about it because she was sure
Alice would say something silly.
    Next day she finished the job for Mr. Barrow. All
morning she wanted to ask him about Mr. Moorehouse,
where he lived, whether he was married or not, where
he came from, but she reflected it wouldn’t be much use.
That afternoon, after she had been paid, she found herself
walking along H Street past the Shoreham. She pretended
to herself that she wanted to look in the storewmdows.
She didn’t see him, but she saw a big shiny black lim-
ousine with a monogram that she couldn’t make out with-
                                                                                        she
out stooping and it would look funny if she stooped 5
decided that was his car.
    She walked down the street to the corner opposite the
big gap in the houses where they were tearing down the
Axlington. It was a clear sunny afternoon. She walked
         292

310
round Lafayette Square looking at the statue of Andrew
Jackson on a rearing horse among the bare trees.
   There were children and nursemaids grouped on the
benches. A man with a grizzled Vandyke with a black
portfolio under his arm sat down on one of the benches
                                                                                 foreign
and immediately got up again and strode off 5
diplomatj thought Janey^ and how fine it was to live in the
Capital City where there were foreign diplomats and
men like J. Ward Moorehouse. She walked once more
round the statue of Andrew Jackson reanng green and
noble on a greennoble horse in the russet winter afternoon
sunlight and then back towards the Shoreham, walking
fast as if she were late to an appointment. She asked a
bellboy where the public stenographer was. He sent her
up to a room on the second floor where she asked an acid-
eyed woman with a long jaw, who was typing away with
her eyes on the little sector of greencarpeted hall she
could see through the halfopen door, whether she knew
of anyone who wanted a stenographer. The acideyed
woman stared at her. ^Well, this isn^t an agency, you
know.” “I knowj I just thought on the chance . .             said

Janey, feeling everything go suddenly out of her.
you mind if I sit down a moment?” The acideyed woman
continued staring at her.
    ^^Now, where have I seen you before . . . ? No, don^t
                                              you were working at Mrs.
remind me . . . You . . .
Robinson^s the day I came in to take out her extra work.
There, you see, I remember you perfectly.” The woman
smiled a yellow smile.            have remembered you,” said
Janey, “only Tm so tired of going round looking for a

job.”
    “Don^t I know?” sighed the woman.
    “Don’t you know anything I could get?”

    “I’ll tell you what you do . . . They were phoning
for a girl to take dictation in number eight. They’re using

                                                                               293

311
’em up like . . . like sixty in there, incorporating some

^^oncern or something. Now, my dear, you listen to me,

^ ou go in there and take off your hat like you’d come from
somewhere and start taking dictation and they won’t throw
you out, my dear, even if the other girl just came, they
use ’em up too fast.”
    Before Janey knew what she was doing she’d kissed
the acideyed woman on the edge of the jaw and had
walked fast along the corridor to number eight and was
being let in by the sleekhaired man who recognized her
and asked, ^^Stenographer

   ‘^^Yes,” said Janey and in another minute she had taken
out her pad and paper and taken off her hat and coat and
was sitting at the end of the shmydark mahogany table

in front of the crackling fire, and the firelight glinted on
silver decanters and hotwater pitchers and teapots and
on the black perfectly shined shoes and in the flameblue
                Ward Moorehouse.
eyes of J.
                                                                                    Ward
    There she was sitting taking dictation from J.
Moorehouse.
   At the end of the afternoon the sleekhaired man came
                                                                                    Ward
in and said, ^^Time to dress for dinner, sir,” and J.
Moorehouse grunted and said, ^^Hell.” The sleekhaired
man skated a little nearer across the thick carpet. ^^Beg
pardon, sir; Miss Rosenthal’s fallen down and broken
’^r ’ip. Fell on the hice in front of the Treasury Buildin’,
dr.”
    “The hell she has . . . Excuse me. Miss Williams,”
he said and smiled. Janey looked up at him indulgent-
understandingly and smiled too. “Has she been fixed up
all right?”
    “Mr. Mulligan took her to the orspital, sir.”
    “That’s right ... You go downstairs, Morton, and
«end her some flowers. Pick out nice ones,”
    “Yessir . . . About five dollars’ worth, sir?’*

         294

312
    “Two fifty’s the limits Morton, and put my card in.”
                                           Ward Moorehouse walked up
    Morton disappeared. J.
and down in front of the fireplace for a while as if he were
going to dictate. Janey’s poised pencil hovered above the
            Ward Moorehouse stopped walking up and down
pad. J.
and looked at Janey. “Do you know anyone, Miss Wil-
liams ... I want a nice smart girl as stenographer and
secretary, someone I can repose confidence in . . . Damn
that woman for breaking her hip.”
    Janey’s head swam. “Well, Pm looking for a position
of that sort myself.”
        Ward Moorehouse was still looking at her with a
    J.
quizzical blue stare. “Do you mind telling me, Miss Wil-
liams, why you lost your last job?”
    “Not at all. I left Dreyfus and Carroll, perhaps you
know them ... I didn’t like w^hat was going on round
there. It would have been different if old Mr. Carroll
had stayed, though Mr. Dreyfus was very kind, I’rr
sure.”
    “He’s an agent of the German government.”
    “That’s what I mean. I didn’t like to stay after the
President’s proclamation.”
    “Well, round here we’re all for the Allies, so it’ll be
quite all right. I think you’re just the person I like . .            .
Of course, can’t be sure, but all my best decisions are made
in a hurry. How about twentyfive a week to begin oni^”

                                                      it’s going to be very in-
    “All right, Mr. Moorehouse j
teresting work, I’m sure.”
    “Tomorrow at nine please, and send these telegrams
from me as you go out:

                    Ward Moorehouse
  ' “Mrs. J.
        “Great Neck Long Island New York
    “May have to go Mexico City explain Saltworths tin-
able attend dinner Hope everything allright love to all
Ward
                                                                               295

313
   *'‘Miss Eleanor Stoddard
               E nth Street New York

    ^Write me what you want brought back from Mexico

ts ever J.W.

   ^^Do you mind traveling, Miss Williams?”
    “Fve never traveled, but Pm sure I’d like it.”
    “I may have to take a small office force down with
me ... oil business. Let you know in a day or two . . .

                                         Ward Moorehouse
    “James Frunze c/o J.
       “lOO Fifth Avenue New York
    “Advise me immediately shoreham development situa-
tion A and B Barrow restless release statement on unity
of interest amencanism versus foreign socialistic rubbish.
JWM . . .

                           that’ll be all today. When youVe typed
    “Thank you 5
those out and sent the wires you may go.”
        Ward Moorehouse went through a door in the back,
   J.
taking his coat off as he went. When Janey had typed the
articles and was slipping out of the hotel lobby to send the
wires at the Western Union she caught a glimpse of him
in a dress sixit with a gray felt hat on and a buffcolored
overcoat over his arm. He was hurrying into a taxi and
didn’t see her. It was very late when she went home. Her
cheeks were flushed but she didn’t feel tired. Alice was
sitting up reading on the edge of the bed. “Oh, I was so
worried . . she began, but Janey threw her arms round
her and told her she had a job as private secretary to J.
Ward Moorehouse and that she was going to Mexico.
Alice burst out crying, but Janey was feeling so happy
she couldn’t stop to notice it but went on to tell her every*
thing about the afternoon at the Shoreham.





         296

314
                THE ELECTRICAL WIZARD


        Edison was born in Milan, Ohio, in eighteen
fortyseven j
        Milan was a little town on the Huron River that
for a while was the wheatshipping port for the whole
                                 the railroads took away the carty-
Western Reserve 5
ing trade, the Edison family went up to Port Huron
in Michigan to grow up with the country 5
        his father was a shinglemaker who puttered round
                                                        he dealt in grain and
with various small speculations 5
feed and lumber and built a wooden tower a hundred
                  tourists and excursionists paid a quarter each
feet high j
to go up the tower and look at the view over Lake
Huron and the St. Clair River and Sam Edison became
a solid and respected citizen of Port Huron.

        Thomas Edison only went to school for three
months because the teacher thought he wasn’t right
bright. His mother taught him what she knew at
home and read eighteenth century writers with him,
Gibbon and Hume and Newton, and let him rig up a
laboratory in the cellar.

         Whenever he read about anything he went down
 cellar and tried it out.
         When he was twelve he needed money to buy
                                         he got a concession as news-
 books and chemicals j
 butcher on the daily train from Detroit to Port Huron,
 In Detroit there was a public library and he read it.
         He rigged up a laboratory on the train and when-
 ever he read about anything he tried it out. He rigged
 up a printing press and printed a paper called The
 Herald^ when the Civil War broke out he organized
 a newsservice and cashed in on the big battles. Then
 he dropped a stick of phosphorus and set the car on

 fire and was thrown off the train.                           297

315
        By that time he had considerable fame in the
country as the boy editor of the first newspaper to be
published on a moving train. The London Times
wrote him up.


        He learned telegraphy and got a job as night
operator at Stratford Junction in Canada, but one day
he let a freighttrain get past a switch and had to
move on.
         (During the Civil War a man that knew teleg-
»-aphy could get a job anywhere.)
        Edison traveled round the country taking jobs
and dropping them and moving on, reading all the
books he could lay his hands on, whenever he read
about a scientific experiment he tried it out, whenever
he could get near an engine he’d tinker with it, when-
ever they left him alone in a telegraph office he’d do
tricks with the wires. That often lost him the job and
he had to move on.
         He was tramp operator through the whole Mid-
dle West: Detroit, Cincinnati, Indianapolis, Louisville,
New Orleans, always broke, his clothes stained with
chemicals, always trying tricks with the telegraph.
         He worked for the Western Union in Boston.
         In Boston he doped out the model of his first
 patent, an automatic voterecorder for use in Congress,
 but they didn’t want an automatic voterecorder in
 Congress, so Edison had the trip to Washington and
 made some debts and that was all he got out of that;
 he worked out a stockticker and burglar alarms and
 burned all the skin off his face with nitric acid.



          But New York was already the big market for
  stocks and ideas and gold and greenbacks.
          298

316
        {This fart is written by Horatio Alger:)
        When Edison got to New York he was stony
broke and had debts in Boston and Rochester. This
was when gold was at a premium and Jay Gould was
trying to corner the gold market. Wall Street was
crazy. A man named Law had rigged up an electric
indicator (Callahan’s invention) that indicated the
price of gold in brokers’ offices. Edison, looking for
a job, broke and with no place to go, had been hanging
round the central office passing the time of day with
the operators when the general transmitter stopped
with a crash in the middle of a rush day of nervous
trading; everybody in the office lost his head. Edison
stepped up and fixed the machine and landed a job at
$300 a month.
        In sixtynine the year of Black Friday he started
an electrical engineering firm with a man named Pope.
        From then on he was on his own, he invented a
stock ticker and it sold. He had a machineshop and a
laboratory; whenever he thought of a device he tried

it out. He made forty thousand dollars out of the
Universal Stock Ticker.


        He rented a shop in Newark and worked on an
automatic telegraph and on devices for sending two
and four messages at the same time over the same wire.
        In Newark he tinkered with Sholes on the first
typewriter, and invented the mimeograph, the carbon
rheostat, the microtasimeter and first made paraffin
paper.



         Something he called etheric force worried him, he
puzzled a lot about etheric force but it was Marconi
who cashed in on the Hertzian waves. Radio was ta
                                                                               299

317
smash the ancient universe. Radio was to kill the old
Euclidian God, but Edison was never a man to worry
about philosophical concepts j
        he worked all day and all night dnkering with
cogwheels and bits of copperwire and chemicals in bot-
tles, whenever he thought of a device he tried it out.
He made things work. He wasn’t a mathematician.
T can hire mathematicians but mathematicians can’t

.lire me, he said.
         In eighteen seventysix he moved to Menlo Park
where he invented the carbon transmitter that made
the telephone a commemal proposition, that made the
microphone possible
         he worked all day and all night and produced
                 the phonograph
                          the incandescent electric lamp



         and systems of generation, distribution, regulation
and measurement of electric current, sockets, switches,
insulators, manholes. Edison worked out the first sys-
tems of electric light using the direct current and small
unit lamps and the multiple arc that were installed in
London Paris New York and Sunbury Pa.,
                                      the threewire system,
                                          the magnetic ore separator,
                                              an electric railway.
         He kept them busy at the Patent Office filing pat-
ents and caveats.
         fo find a filament for his electric lamp that would
 vork, that would be a sound commercial proposition
 ae tried all kinds of paper and cloth, thread, fishline,
fibre, celluloid, boxwood, cocoanut-shells, spruce, hick-
ory, bay, mapleshavings, rosewood, punk, cork, flax,
bamboo and the hair out of a redheaded Scotchman’s
beard j
         300

318
        whenever he got a hunch he tried it out.
        In eighteen eightyseven he moved to the huge
laboratories at West Orange.
        He invented rockcrushers and the fluoroscope and
the reeled film for movie cameras and the alkaline
storage battery and the long kiln foi burning out port-
land cement and the kinetophone that was the first
talking movie and the poured cement house that is to
furnish cheap artistic identical sanitary homes for
workers in the electrical age.


        Thomas A. Edison at eightjftwo worked sixteen
hours a dayj
        he never worried about mathematics or the social
system or generalized philosophical concepts j
        in collaboration with Henry Ford and Harvey
Firestone who never worried about mathematics or the
social system or generalized philosophical concepts;
        he worked sixteen hours a day trying to find a
substitute for rubber, whenever he read about any-
thing he tried it out; whenever he got a hunch he went
to the laboratory and tried it out.


                            THE CAMERA EYE (25)


        those spring nights the streetcarwheels screech grind-

ing in a rattle of loose trucks round the curved tracks of

Harvard Square dust hangs in the powdery arclight glare

allnight till dawn can^t sleep

        haven’t got the nerve to break out of the bellglass

        four years under the etherconc breathe deep

                                                                              301

319
now that’s the way be a good boy one two three four

five SIX get A’s in some courses but don’t be a grind be

interested in literature but remain a gentleman don’t be

seen with Jews or socialists

       and all the pleasant contacts will be useful in Later

Life say hello pleasantly to everybody crossing the yard

        sit looking out into the twilight of the pleasantest

four years of your life

        grow cold with culture like a cup of tea forgotten

between an incenseburner and a volume of Oscar Wilde

cold and not strong like a claret lemonade drunk at a

Pop Concert in Symphony Hall

        four years I didn’t know you could do what you

 Michaelangelo wanted say

                                      Marx

                                              to all

tjie professors with a small Swift break all the Greenoughs

in the shooting gallery

        but tossed with eyes smarting all the spring night

reading The Tragical History of Doctor Fcmstus and
went mad listening to the streetcarwheels screech grind-

ing in a rattle of loose trucks round Harvard Square
 and the trains crying across the saltmarshes and the rum-

 bling siren of a steamboat leaving dock and the blue peter

 flying and millworkers marching with a red brass band

 through the streets of Lawrence Massachusetts

         302

320
        It was like the Magdeburg spheres the pressure out-

side sustained the vacuum within

        and I hadn’t the nerve

                     to jump up and walk out of doors and tel

them all to go take a flying

                                           Rimbaud

                                                     at the moon




                                                     NEWSREEL XVIl


        an attack by a number of hostile airships developed be-

fore midnight. Bombs were dropped somewhat indiscrim-*

inately over localities possessing no military importance

                      RAILROADS WON’t YIELD AN INCH

         We shall have to make the passage under conditions not

entirely advantageous to us, said Captain Koenig of the
Deutschland ninety miles on his way passing Solomon’s Island

at 2.30. Every steamer passed blew his whistle in salute.

              You make me what I am today
                      I hofe you^re satisfied
              You dragged me down and down and down
                       Until the soul voithin me died

         Sir Roger Casement was hanged in Pentonville Gaol at

 nine o’clock this morning.

             U-BOAT PASSES CAPES UNHINDERED

          clad only in kimono girl bathers shock dairy lunch in-

 stead of first class cafe on amusement dock heavy losses shown

 in US crop report Italians cheered as Austrians leave hot rolls

                                                                                         303

321
in haste to get away giant wall of water rushes down valley
professor says Beethoven gives the impression of a juicy steak

    PRISON’S MAGIC TURNS CITY TUNK INTO
                                   GOLD MINE
  MOON WILL HIDE PLANET SATURN FROM SIGHT TONIGHT

                BROTHERS FIGHT IN DARK



                                                                                MAC


    The rebels took Juarez and Huerta fled and the steam-
boats to Europe were packed with cientificos making for
Paris and Venustiano Carranza was president in Mexico
City. Somebody got Mac a pass on the Mexican Central
down to the capital. Encarnacion cried when he left and
all the anarchists came down to the station to see him off.
Mac wanted to join Zapata. He’d picked up a little Span-
ish from Encarnacion and a vague idea of the politics of
the revolution. The train took five days. Five times it was
held up while the section hands repaired the track ahead.
Occasionally at night bullets came through the windows.
Near Caballos a bunch of men on horses rode the whole
length of the train waving their big hats and firing as
they went. The soldiers In the caboose woke up and re-
turned the fire and the men rode off in a driving dust-
cloud. The passengers had to duck under the seats when
the firing began or lie flat In the aisle. After the attack
had been driven off an old woman started to shriek and
it was foxxnd that a child had been hit through the head.
The mother was a stout dark woman in a flowered dress.
She went up and down the train with the tiny bloody body
Wrapped in a shawl asking for a doctor, but anybody could
see that the child was dead,

         304.

322
   Mac thought the trip would never end. He bought
peppery food and lukewarm beer from old Indian women
at stations, tried to drink pulque and to carry on con-
versations with his fellowpassengers. At last they passed
Queretaro and the train began going fast down long
grades in the cold bright air. Then the peaks of the great
volcanos began to take shape m the blue beyond endless
criscrosspatterned fields of centuryplants and suddenly the
train was rattling between garden walls, through feathery
trees. It came to a stop with a clang of couplings- Mexico
City.
    Mac felt lost wandering round the bright streets among
the lowvoiced crowds, the men all dressed in white and
the women all in black or dark blue. The streets were
dusty and sunny and quiet. There were stores open and
cabs and trolleycars and polished limousines. Mac was
worried. He only had two dollars. He’d been on the train
so long he’d forgotten what he intended to do when ho
reached his destination. He wanted clean clothes and a
bath. When he’d wandered round a good deal he saw a
place marked ^^American Bar.” His legs were tired. He
sat down at a table. A waiter came over and asked him irt
English what he wanted. He couldn’t think of anything

else so he ordered a whisky. He drank the whisky and

sat there with his head in his hands. At the bar were a lot
of Americans and a couple of Mexicans in tengallon hats
rolling dice for drinks. Mac ordered another whisky. A
beefy redeyed man in a rumpled khaki shirt was roam-
ing uneasily about the bar. His eye lit on Mac and he sat
down at his table. ^^Mind if I set here awhile, pardner?”
he asked. ^Hhose sonsobitches too damn noisy. Here,
sombrero .  . . wheresat damn waiter? Gimme a glass-

beer. Well, I got the old woman an’ the kids off today

. . . When are you pullin’ out?”
    ^^Why, I just pulled in,” said Mac.
   ^^The hell you say . , . This ain’t no place for a whiter

                                                                             .305

323
/nan . .   . These bandits’ll be on the town any day .        .  *

It’ll be hornblej I tell you. There won’t be a white man
left alive . . * I’ll get some of ’em before they croak
me, though ... By God^ I can account for twentyfive
of ’em, no, twentyfour.” He pulled a Colt out of his back
pocket, emptied the chamber into his hand and started
counting the cartridges, ^^Eight,” then he started going
through his pockets and ranged the cartridges in a row on
the deal table. There were only twenty. ^^Some sonvabitch
robbed me.” A tall lanky man came over from the bar and
put his hand on the redeyed man-^s shoulder. “Eustace,
you’d better put that away till we need it ... You know
what to do, don’t you?” he turned to Macj “as soon as
the shooting begins all American citizens concentrate at
the embassy. There we’ll sell our lives to the last man.”
Somebody yelled from the bar, “Hey, big boy, have an-
other round,” and the tall man went back to the bar.
    “You fellers seem to expect trouble,” said Mac.
    “Trouble—my God^ You don’t know this country.
Did you just come ini^”
    “Blew in from Juarez just now.”
    “You can’t have. Railroad’s all tore up at Queretaro.”
    ^^Vell, they musta got it fixed,” said Mac. “Say, what
do they say round here about Zapata?”
    “My God, he’s the bloodthirstiest vilJain of the lot

.  .  . They roasted a feller was forem^an of a sugar mill
down in Morelos on a slow fire and raped his wife and
daughters right before his eyes .  . My God, pardner,
you don’t know what kind of country this is! Do you
know what we ought to do . . . d’you know what we’d
do if we had a man in the White House instead of a yel-
lowbellied potatomouthed reformer? We’d get up an
army of a hundred thousand men and clean this place up

. .  It’s a hell of a fine country but there’s not one of
these damn greasers worth the powder and shot to shoot
^em . . . smoke ’em out like vermin, that’s what I say

         306

324
* . . Every mother’s sonvabitch o£ ’em ’s a Zapata undes
the skin.”
    “What business are you in?”
    “I’m an oil prospector, and I’ve been m this lousy hole
fifteen years and I’m through. I’d have gotten out on the
train to Vera Cruz today only I have some claims to settle
up an’ my furniture to sell ... You can’t tell when
they’ll cut the railroad and then we won’t be able to get
out and President Wilson’ll let us be shot down right here
like rats in a trap ... If the American public realized
conditions down here , .    , My God, we’re the laughing
stock of all the other nations . . . What’s your line o’
work, pardner?”
    “Printer . . . linotype operator.”
    “Looking for a job^”
    “Mac had brought out a dollar to pay for his drinks.
“I guess I’ll have to,” he said. “That’s my last dollar but
one.” “Why don’t you go round to The Mexican Herdd\
They’re always needin’ English language printers       . .   ,
They can’t keep anybody down here , . . Ain’t fit for a
white man down here no more . . . Look here, pardner,
that drink’s on me.”
    “Well, we’ll have another then, on me.”
   “The fat’s in the fire in this country now, pardnet

. . . everything’s gone to hell . . . might as well have
a drink while we can.”
   That evening, after he’d eaten some supper in a little
American lunchroom, Mac walked round the alameda to
get the whisky out of his head before going up to The
Mexican Herald to see if he could get a job. It would
only be for a couple of weeks, he told himself, till he could
get wise to the lay of the land. The tall trees on the
alameda and the white statues and the fountains and the
welldressed couples strolling round in the gloaming and
the cabs clattering over the cobbles looked quiet enough,
and the row of stonyeyed Indian women selling fruit and

                                                                              307

325
nuts and pink and yellow and green candies In booths
ralong the curb. Mac decided that the man he^d talked to
in the bar had been stringing him along because he was
a tenderfoot.
    He got a job all right at The Mexican Herald at thirty
mex dollars a week, but round the printing plant cvQry-
body talked just like the man in the bar. That night an
old Polish American who was a proofreader there t-ook
him round to a small hotel to get him a flop and lent him
a couple of cartwheels till payday. “You get your wages
in advance as much as you can,” said the old Pole, “one
of these davs there will be revolution and then goodby
Mexican Herald . . . unless Wilson makes intervention
mighty quick.” “Sounds all right to me, I want to see
the social revolution,” said Mac. The old Pole laid his
finger along his nose and shook his head in a peculiar way
and left him.
    When Mac woke up In the morning he was in a small
room calsomined bright yellow. The furniture was painted
blue and there were red curtains in the window. Between
the curtains the long shutters were barred with vivid
 dolet sunlight that cut a warm path across the bedclothes.
A canary was singing somewhere and he could hear the
flap pat flap pat of a woman making tortillas. He got up
and threw open the shutters. The sky was cloudless above
 me redtile roofs. The street was empty and full of sun-
 light. He filled his lungs with cool thin air and felt the
 bun burning his face and arms and neck as he stood there.
 It must be early. He went back to bed and fell asleep
 again.
    When Wilson ordered the Americans out of Mexico
several months later Mac was settled in a little apartment
 in the Plaza del Carmen with a girl named Concha and
 two white Persian cats. Concha had been a stenographer
 and interpreter with an American firm and had been the
 mistress of an oilman for three years so she spoke pretty

          308

326
good English. The oilman had jumped on the train £oi
Vera Cruz in the panic at the time of the flight of Huerta,
leaving Concha high and dry. She had taken a fancy to
Mac from the moment she had first seen him going into
the postoffice. She made him very comfortable, and when
he talked to her about going out to join Zapata, she only
laughed and said peons were ignorant savages and fit
only to be ruled with the whip. Her mother, an old
woman with a black shawl perpetually over her head,
came to cook for them and Mac began to like Mexican'
food, turkey with thick chocolate brown sauce and en-
cheladas with cheese. The cats were named Porfirlo and
Venustiano and always slept on the foot of their bed
Concha was very thrifty and made Mac^s pay go much
further than he could and never complained when he
went out batting round town and came home late and with
a headache from drinking tequila. Instead of trying to gef
on the crowded trains to Vera Cruz, Mac took a little
money he had saved up and bought up the office furniture
that wildeyed American businessmen were selling out ioi
anything they could get for it. He had it piled In the
courtyard back of the house where they lived. Buying it
had been Concha’s Idea in the first place and he used to
tease her about how they’d ever get rid of it again, bu(
she’d nod her head and say, ^^Wait a minute.”
    Concha liked It very much when he’d have friends in
to eat with him Sundays. She would wait on them very
pleasantly and send her little brother Antonio round iot
beer and cognac and always have cakes in the house tc
bring out if anybody dropped in. Mac would sometimes
think how much pleasanter this was than when he’d lived
with Maisie In San Diego, and began to think less often
about going out to join Zapata.
    The Polish proofreader, whose name was Korski, turned
out to be a political exile, a socialist and a wellinformed
man. He would sit all afternoon over a half a glass of

                                                                               309

327
                                                                 since the collapse
cognac talking about European politics j
of the European socialist parties at the beginning of the
war he had taken no part in anything; from now on heM
be an onlooker. He had a theory that civilization and a
mixed diet were causing the collapse of the human race.
    Then there was Ben Stowell, an independent oil pro-
moter who was trying to put through a deal with Car-
ranza’s government to operate some oilwells according to
the law. He was broke most of the time and Mac used to
lend him money, but he always talked in millions. He
tailed himself a progressive in politics and thought that
Zapata and Villa were honest men. Ben Stowell would
always take the opposite side of any argument from
Korski and would infuriate the old man by his antisocial
attitude. Mac wanted to make some money to send up to
Maisie for the kids’ schooling. It made him feel good to
send Rose up a box of toys now and then. He and Ben
would have long talks about the chances of making money
in Mexico. Ben Stowell brought round a couple of young
radical politicians who enjoyed sitting through the after-
noon talking about socialism and drinking and learning
English. Mac usually didn’t say much but sometimes he
got sore and gave them a broadside of straight I.W.W.
doctrine. Concha would finish all arguments by bringing
on supper and saying with a shake of her head, ^^Every
poor man socialista ... a como no? But when you get
rich, quick you all very much capitalista.”
    One Sunday Mac and Concha and some Mexican news-
paper men and Ben Stowell and his girl, Angustias, who
was a chorusgirl at the Lirico, went out on the trolley to
Xochimilco. They hired a boat with a table in it and an
awning and an Indian to pole them round through the
poplarbordered canals among the rich flowerpatches and
Vegetablegardens. They drank pulque and they had a
bottle of whisky with them, and they bought the girls
caila lilies. One of the Mexicans played a guitar and sang*
        310

328
   In the afternoon the Indian brought the boat back ta
a landing and they strolled off in couples into the woods.
Mac suddenly felt very homesick and told Concha about
his children in the U. S. and about Rose particularly, and
she burst into tears and told him how much she loved
children, but that when she was seventeen she had been
very very sick and theyM thought she was going to die
and now she couldn’t have any children, only Porfirio and
Venustiano. Mac kissed her and told her that he’d always
look after her.
    When they got back to the trolleystation, loaded down
with flowers, Mac and Ben let the girls go home alone
and went to a cantina to have a drink. Ben said he was
pretty tired of this sort of thing and wished he could
make his pile and go back to the States to marry and have
a home and a family. ^Wou see, Mac,” he said, ^^I’m forty
years old. Christ, a man can’t bat around all his life.”
^‘Well, I’m not far from it,” said Mac. They didn’t say
much, but Ben walked up with Mac as far as the ofiice

of The Mexican Herald and then went down town to
the Iturbide to see some oilmen who were staying there.
^Well, it’s a great life if you don’t weaken,” he said as he
waved his hand at Mac and started down the street. He
was a stocky bullnecked man with a bowlegged walk.
    Several days later Ben came around to the Plaza del
Carmen before Mac was out of bed. ^^Mac, you come and
eat with me this noon,” he said. ^‘There’s a guy named
G. H. Barrow here I want to kinda show the town a little

bit. He might be useful to us ... I want to know what

he’s after anyway.” The man was writing articles on the
Mexican situation and was said to have some connection
with the A. F. of L. At lunch he asked anxiously if the
water was safe and whether it wasn’t dangerous to walk
round the streets after nightfall. Ben Stowell kidded him
along a little and told him stories of generals and their

friends breaking into a bar and shooting into the floor to

329
make the customers dance and then using the place for a
footing gallery. ^^The shooting gallery, that^s what they

call congress here,” said Mac. Barrow said he was going
to a meeting of the Union Nacional de Trabajadores that
afternoon and would they mind going with him to inter-
pret for him. It was Mac’s day off so they said, “All
right.” He said he’d been instructed to try to make con-

tacts with stable labor elements in Mexico with the hope
of joining them up with the Pan-American Federation of
Labor. Gompers would come down himself if something
could be lined up. He said he’d been a shipping clerk and
a Pullman conductor and had been in the ofSce of the
Railroad Brotherhood, but now he was working for the
A. F. of L. He wished American workers had more ideas
about the art of life. He’d been at the Second International
meetings at Amsterdam and felt the European workers
understood the art of life. When Mac asked him why the
hell the Second International hadn’t done something to
stop the World War, he said the time wasn’t ripe yet and
spoke about German atrocities.
    “The German atrocities are a Sundayschool picnic to
what goes on every day in Mexico,” said Ben* Then Bar-
row went to ask whether Mexicans were as immoral as it
was made out. The beer they were drinking with their
lunch was pretty strong and they all loosened up a little.
Barrow wanted to know whether it wasn’t pretty risky
going out with girls here on account of the high percent-
age of syphilis. Mac said yes, but that he and Ben could
show him some places that were all right if he wanted to
look ’em over, Barrow tittered and looked embarrassed
and said he’d just as soon look ’em over. “A man ought to
see every side of things when he’s investigating condi-
tions.” Ben Stowell slapped his hand on the edge of the
table and said that Mac was just the man to show him
the backside of Mexico.
    They went to the meeting that was crowded with
        312

330
slender dark men m blue denim. At first they couldn’t
get in on account of the crowd packed in the aisles and
in the back of the hallj but Mac found an official he knew
who gave them seats in a box. The hall was very stuffy
and the band played and there was singing and the
speeches were very long. Barrow said listening to a for-
eign language made him sleepy, and suggested that they
                                 he’d heard that the red light district
walk around town 3
was ... he was interested in conditions.
    Outside the hall they ran across Enrique Salvador, a
newspaperman that Ben knew. He had a car and a chauf-
feur. He shook hands and laughed and said the car be-
longed to the chief of police who was a friend of his and
wouldn’t they like to ride out to San Angel? They went
out the long avenue past Chapultepec, the Champs Elysees
of Mexico, Salvador called it. Near Tacubaya Salvador
pointed out the spot where Carranza’s troops had had a
skirmish with the Zapatistas the week before and a corner
where a rich clothing merchant had been murdered by
bandits, and G. H. Barrow kept asking was it quite safe
to go so far out in the country, and Salvador said, am
a newspaperman. I am everybody’s friend.”
    Out at San Angel they had some drinks and when they
got back to the city they drove round the Pajaritos district.
G. H. Barrow got very quiet and his eyes got a watery
look when he saw the little lighted cribhouses, each one
with a bed and some paperflowers and a crucifix that you
could see through the open door, past a red or blue cur-

tain, and the dark quiet Indian girls in short chemises
standing outside their doors or sitting on the sill.
     ^^You see,” said Ben Stowell, ffit’s easy as rolling off
a log . . . But I don’t advise you to get too careless
 round here  . . . Salvador’ll show us a good joint after
 supper. He ought to know because he’s a friend of the*
 chief of police and he runs most of them.”
     But Barrow wanted to go into one of the cribs so they

                                                                               313

331
got out and talked to one of the girls and Salvador sent
the chauffeur to get a couple of bottles of beer. The girl
received them very politely and Barrow tried to get Mac
to ask her questions, but Mac didn^t like asking her ques-
tions so he let Salvador do it. When G. H. Barrow put
his hand on her bare shoulder and tried to pull her chemise
off and asked how much did she want to let him see her
all naked, the girl didn^t understand and tore herself
away from him and yelled and cursed at him and Salvador
wouldn’t translate what she said. “Let’s get this bastard
outa here,” said Ben in a low voice to Mac, “before we
have to get in a fight or somethin’.”
    They had a tequila each before dinner at a little bar
where nothing was sold but tequila out of varnished kegs.
Salvador showed G. H. Barrow how to drink it, first
putting salt on the hollow between his thumb and fore-
finger and then gulping the little glass of tequila, licking
op the salt and swallowing some chile sauce to finish up
with, but he got it down the wrong way and choked.
    At supper they were pretty drunk and G. H. Barrow
kept saying that Mexicans understood the art of life and
that was meat for Salvador who talked about the Indian
genius and the Latin genius and said that Mac and Ben
were the only gringos he ever met he could get along
with, and insisted on their not paying for their meal. He’d
charge it to his friend the chief of police. Next they went
to a cantina beside a theater where there were said to be
French girls, but the French girls weren’t there. There
were three old men in the cantina playing a cello, a violin
and a piccolo. Salvador made them play La Adelita and
everybody sang it and then La Cucaracha, There was an
old man in a broadbrimmed hat with a huge shiny pistol-
holster on his back, who drank up his drink quickly when
they came in and left the bar. Salvador whispered to Mac
that he was General Gonzales and had left in order not
to be seen drinking with gringos.

         314

332
   Ben and Barrow sat with their heads together at a
table in the corner talking about the oil business. Barrow
was saying that there was an investigator for certain oi{
interests coming down3 he’d be at the Regis almost any
day now and Ben was saying he wanted to meet him and
Barrow put his arm around his shoulder and said he wat,
sure Ben was just the man this investigator would want
to meet to get an actual working knowledge of conditions.
Meanwhile Mac and Salvador were dancing the Cuban
danzon with the girls. Then Barrow got to his feet a little
unsteadily and said he didn’t want to wait for the French
girls but why not go to that place where they’d been and
try some of the dark meat, but Salvador insisted on taking-
them to the house of Remedios near the American em-
bassy. ^^Quelquecosa de chic,” he’d say in bad French. It
was a big house with a marble stairway and crystal chande >

liers and salmonbrocaded draperies and lace curtains and
mirrors everywhere. ^Tersonne que les henerales vieng
aqui,” he said when he’d introduced them to the madam,
who was a darkeyed grayhaired woman in black with a
black shawl who looked rather like a nun. There w^as only
one girl left unoccupied so they fixed up Barrow with
her and arranged about the price and left him. “Whew,
that’s a relief,” said Ben when they came out. The air
was cold and the sky was all stars.
   Salvador had made the three old men with their instru>
ments get into the back of the car and said he felt romantic
and wanted to serenade his novia and they went out tch
wards Guadalupe speeding like mad along the broad cause-
way. Mac and the chauffeur and Ben and Salvador and
the three old men singing La Adehta and the instruments
chirping all off key. In Guadalupe they stopped under
some buttonball trees against the wall of a house with big
grated windows and sang Cielito Undo and La Adelita
and Cuatro milfoSy and Ben and Mac sang            to keef
her from the foggy foggy dew and were just starting OA,

333
bury me not on the lone p'oirie when a girl came to the
window and talked a long time in low Spanish to Sal-
vador,
   Salvador said, “Ella dit que nous make escandalo and
must go away, Tres chic.”
   By that time a patrol of soldiers had come up and were
about to arrest them all when the officer arrived and rec-
ognized the car and Salvador and took them to have a
drink with him at his billet. When they all got home to
Mac’s place they were very drunk. Concha, whose face
was drawn from waiting up, made up a mattress for Ben
in the diningroom and as they were all going to turn in
Ben said, “By heavens, Concha, you’re a swell girl. When
I make my pile Pll buy you the handsomest pair of dia-
mond earrings in the Federal District.” The last they saw
of Salvador he was standing up in the front seat of the car
as it went round the corner on two wheels conducting the
three old men in La AdeUta with big gestures like an
orchestra leader.
    Before Christmas Ben Stowell came back from a trip'
to Tamaulipas feeling fine. Things were looking up for
him. He’d made an arrangement with a local general neat
Tampico to run an oil well on a fifty-fifty basis. Through
Salvador he’d made friends with some members of Car-
ranza’s cabinet and was hoping to be able to turn over a
deal with some of the big claimholders up in the States.
He had plenty of cash and took a room at the Regis. One
day he went round to the printing plant and asked Mac
to step out in the alley with him for a minute.
    “Look here, Mac,” he said, “I’ve got an offer for you

 , .  . You know old Worthington’s bookstore? Well, I
got drunk last night and bought him out for two thousand
pesos . . . He’s pulling up stakes and going home tq
blighty, he says.”
    “The hell you did!”
    ^Well, I’m just as glad to have him out of the way.”
         316

334
   ^^Why, you old whoremaster, youVe after Lisa.”
                maybe she^s just as glad to have him out of th^
way too.”
   “She’s certainly a goodlooker.”
    “I got a lot a news I’ll tell you later  . . Ain’t gom^
to be so healthy lound The Mexican Herald maybe      . . .
I’ve got a proposition for you, Mac .  . Christ knows I
owe you a hellova lot ... You know that load of office
furniture you have out back Concha made you buy that
time?” Mac nodded. “Well, I’ll take it off your hands and
give you a half interest m that bookstore. I’m opening an
office. You know the book business . . . you told me
yourself you did . .      . the profits for the first year are
yours and after that we split two ways, see*^ You certainly
ought to make it pay. That old fool Worthington didj
and kept Lisa into the bargain . . . Are you on^^”
    “Jez, lemme think it over, Ben . . . but I got to go
back to the daily bunksheet.”
    So Mac found himself running a bookstore on the Calle
Independencia with a line of stationery and a few type-
writers. It felt good to be his own boss for the first time
in his life. Concha, who was a storekeeper’s daughter, wai
delighted. She kept the books and talked to the customers
so that Mac didn’t have much to do but sit in the back and
read and talk to his friends. That Christmas Ben and Lisa,
who was a tall Spanish girl said to have been a dancer in
Malaga, with a white skin like a camellia and ebony hair^
gave all sorts of parties in an apartment with American-
style bath and kitchen that Ben rented out in the new
quarter towards Chapultepec. The day the Asociacion de
Publicistas had its annual banquet, Ben stopped into the
bookstore feeling fine and told Mac he wanted him and
Concha to come up after supper and wouldn’t Concha
bring a couple of friends, nice wellbehaved girls not too
choosy, like she knew. He was giving a party for G. H.
Barrow who was back from Vera Cruz and a big contad'

                                                                               317

335
man from New York who was wangling something, Ben
didn^t know just what. He^d seen Carranza yesterday and
at the banquet everybody’d kowtowed to him.
                                                                              they took
    ^^Jez, Mac, you oughta been at that banquet 5
one of the streetcars and had a table the whole length of

it and an orchestra and rode us out to San Angel and back
and then all round town.’^
         saw ’em starting out,” said Mac, ^^looked too much
like a funeral to me.”
    “Jez, it was swell though. Salvador an’ everybody was.
there and this guy Moorehouse, the big hombre from New
York, jez, he looked like he didn’t know if he was cornin’
or goin’. Looked like he expected a bomb to go off under
the seat any minute . .     . hellova good thing for Mexico
if one had, when you come to think of it. All the worst
crooks in town were there.”
    The party at Ben’s didn’t come off so well. J. Ward
 Moorehouse didn’t make up to the girls as Ben had hoped.
 He brought his secretary, a tired blond girl, and they
both looked scared to death. They had a dinner Mexican
style and champagne and a great deal of cognac and a
victrola played records by Victor Herbert and Irving
 Berlin and a little itinerant band attracted by the crowd
played Mexican airs on the street outside. After dinner
things were getting a little noisy inside so Ben and Moore-
 house took chairs out on the balcony and had a long talk
                                                                       Ward Moore-
about the oil situation over their cigars. J.
 house explained that he had come down in a purely un-
 ofEcial capacity you understand to make contacts, to find
 out what the situation was and just what there was behind
 Carranza’s stubborn opposition to American investors and
 that the big businessmen he was in touch with in the States
 desired only fair play and that he felt that if their point
 of view could be thoroughly understood through some
 information bureau or the friendly cooperation of Mexi-
 can newspapermen.

          318

336
   Ben went back in the diningroom and brought out
Enrique Salvador and Mac. They all talked over the
                           Ward Moorehouse said that speaking as
situation and J.
an old newspaperman himself he thoroughly understood
the situation of the press, probably not so different in
Mexico City from that in Chicago or Pittsburgh and that
all the newspaperman wanted was to give each fresh angle
of the situation its proper significance in a spirit of fair
play and friendly cooperation, but that he felt that the
Mexican papers had been misinformed about the aims of
American business in Mexico just as the Americ;m press
was misinformed about the aims of Mexican politics. If
Mr. Enrique would call by the Regis he’d be delighted to
talk to him more fully, or to any one of you gentlemen
and if he wasn’t in, due to the great press of appointments
and the very few days he had to spend in the Mexican
capital, his secretary. Miss Williams, would be only too
willing to give them any information they wanted and a
few specially prepared strictly confidential notes on the
attitude of the big American corporations with which he
was purely informally in touch.
    After that he said he was sorry but he had telegrams
waiting for him at the Regis and Salvador took him and
Miss Williams, his secretary, home in the chief of police’s
automobile.
    “Jez, Ben, that’s a smooth bastard,” said Mac to Ben
              Ward Moorehouse had gone.
after J.
    “Mac,” said Ben, “that baby’s got a slick cream of mil-
lions all over him. By gum, I’d like to make some of
these contacts he talks about ... By gorry, I may do it
yet ... You just watch your Uncle Dudley, Mac. I’m
goin’ to associate with the big hombres after this.”
    After that the party was not so refined. Ben brought
out a lot more cognac and the men started taking the girls
into the bedrooms and hallways and even into the pantry
and kitchen. Barrow cottoned onto a blonde named Nadia

                                                                               319

337
who was half English and talked to her all evening about
the art of life. After everybody had gone Ben found them
locked up m his bedroom.
    Mac got to like the life of a storekeeper. He got up
when he wanted to and walked up the sunny streets past
the cathedral and the fagade of the national palace and
up Independencia where the sidewalks had been freshly
sprinkled with water and a morning wind was blowing
through, sweet with the smell of flowers and roasting
coffee. Concha’s little brother Antonio would have the
shutters down and be sweeping out the store by the time
he got there. Mac would sit in the back reading or
would roam about the store chatting with people in Eng-
lish and Spanish. He didn’t sell many books, but he kept
all the American and European papers and magazines and
they sold well, especially The Police Gazette and La Vie
Pansienne, He started a bank account and was planning to
take on some typewriter agencies. Salvador kept telling
him he’d get him a contract to supply stationery to some
government department and make him a rich man.
    One morning he noticed a big crowd in the square in
front of the National Palace. He went into one of the
cantinas under the arcade and ordered a glass of beer. The
waiter told him that Carranza’s troops had lost Torreon
and that Villa and Zapata were closing in on the Federal
District. When he got to the bookstore news was going
down the street that Carranza’s government had fled and
that the revolutionists would be in the city before night.
The storekeepers began to put up their shutters. Concha
and her mother came in crymg saying that it would be
worse than the terrible week when Madero fell and that
the revolutionists had sworn to burn and loot the city. An-
tonio ran in saying that the Zapatistas were bombarding
Tacuba. Mac got a cab and went over to the Chamber of
Deputies to see if he could find anybody he knew. All the
ioors were open to the street and there were papers lit-

         3^0

338
tered along the corridors. There was nobody in the theata
but an old Indian and his wife who were walking round
hand in hand looking reverently at the gilded ceiling and
the paintings and the tables covered with green plush. The
old man carried his hat in his hand as if he were in
church.
    Mac told the cabman to drive to the paper where Sal-
vador worked, but the janitor there told him with a wink
that Salvador had gone to Vera Cruz with the chief of
police. Then he went to the Embassy where he couldn’t
get a word with anybody. All the anterooms were full of
Americans who had come in from ranches and concessions
and who were cursing out President Wilson and giving
each other the horrors with stories of the revolutionists.
At the consulate Mac met a Syrian who offered to buy his
stock of books. ^^No, you don’t,” said Mac and went back
down Independencia.
    When he got back to the store newsboys were already
running through the street crying, ^Wiva la revolucion
revindicadora.” Concha and her mother were in a panic
and said they must get on the train to Vera Cruz or they’d

all be murdered. The revolutionists were sacking convents
and murdering priests and nuns. The old woman dropped
on her knees in the corner of the room and began chant-
ing ^^Ave Marias.”
    “Aw, hell!” said Mac, “let’s sell out and go back to
the States. Want to go to the States, Concha?” Concha
nodded vigorously and began to smile through her tears,
“But what the devil can we do with your mother and
Antonio?” Concha said she had a married sister in Vera
Cruz. They could leave them there if they could ever get
to Vera Cruz.
    Mac, the sweat pouring off him, hurried back to the
consulate to find the Syrian. They couldn’t decide on the

price. Mac was desperate because the banks were all closed
 and there was no way of getting any money. The Syrian

                                                                               321

339
said that he was from the Lebanon and an American
citizen and a Christian and that he’d lend Mac a hundred
dollars if Mac would give him a sixtyday note hypothecat-
ing his share in the bookstore for two hundred dollars. He
said that he was an American citizen and a Christian and
was risking his life to save Mac’s wife and children. Mac
was so flustered he noticed just in time that the Syrian
was giving him a hundred dollars mex and that the note
was made out in American dollars. The Syrian called upon
God to protect them both and said it was an error and
Mac went off with two hundred pesos in gold.
    He found Concha all packed. She had closed up the
store and was standing on the pavement outside with some
bundles, the two cats in a basket, and Antonio and her
mother, each wrapped in a blanket.
    They found the station so packed full of people and
baggage they couldn’t get in the door. Mac went round
to the yards and found a man named McGrath he knew
who worked for the railroad. McGrath said he could fix
them up but that they must hurry. He put them into a
secondclass coach out in the yards and said he’d buy their
tickets but would probably have to pay double for them.
Sweat was pouring from under Mac’s hatband when he
finally got the two women seated and the basket of cats
and the bundles and Antonio stowed away. The train was
already full, although it hadn’t backed into the station yet.
After several hours the train pulled out, a line of dusty
soldiers fighting back the people on the platform who
tried to rush the train as it left. Every seat was taken, the
aisles were full of priests and nuns, there were welldressed
people hanging onto the platforms.
    Mac didn’t have much to say sitting next to Concha in
the dense heat of the slowmoving train. Concha sighed a
great deal and her mother sighed, ^^Ay de mi dios,” and
they gnawed on chickenwings and ate almond paste. The
tram was often stopped by groups of soldiers patrolling
         322

340
the line. On sidings were many boxcars loaded with troops,
but nobody seemed to know what side they were on. Mac
looked out at the endless crisscross ranks of centuryplants
and the crumbling churches and watched the two huge
snowy volcanos, Popocatepetl and Ixtaccihatl, change places
                          then there was another goldenbrown cone
on the horizon 3
of an extinct volcano slowly turning before the trains then

it was the bluewhite peak of Orizaba m the distance grow-
ing up taller and taller into the cloudless sky.
    After Huarnantla they ran down through clouds. The
rails rang under the merry clatter of the wheels curving
down steep grades in the misty winding valley through
moist forestgrowth. They began to feel easier. With every
loop of the train the air became warmer and damper.
They began to see orange and lemontrees. The windows
were all open. At stations women came through selling
beer and pulque and chicken and tortillas.
    At Orizaba it was sunny again. The train stopped a long
time. Mac sat drinking beer by himself in the station res-
taurant. The other passengers were laughing and talking
but Mac felt sore.
    When the bell rang he didn^t want to go back to
Concha and her mother and their sighs and their greasy
fingers and their chickenwings.
    He got on another car. Night was coming on full of the
smells of flowers and warm earth.
    It was late the next day when they got into Vera Cruz.
The town was full of flags and big red banners stretched
 from wall to wall of the orange and lemon and banana-
colored streets with their green shutters and the palms
waving in the seawind. The banners read: ^Wiva Obre-
 gon,” ^Wiva La Revolucion Revindicadora,” ^Wiva El
 Partido Laborista.^^
     In the main square a band was playing and people
 were dancing. Scared daws flew cawing among the dark
 umbrellashafx'd trees.

                                                                               323

341
    Mac left Concha and her bundles and the old woman
and Antonio on a bench and went to the Ward Line office

to see about passage to the States. There everybody was
talking about submarine warfare and America entering the
Great War and German atrocities and Mac found that
there was no boat for a week and that he didn’t have
enough cash even for two steerage passages. He bought
himself a single steerage passage. He’d begun to suspect
that he was making a damn fool of himself and decided
to go without Concha.
   When he got back to where she was sitting she’d bought
custardapples and mangos. The old woman and Antonio
had gone oif with the bundles to find her sister’s house.
The white cats were out of their basket and were curled
up on the bench beside her. She looked up at Mac with a
quick confident blackeyed smile and said that Porfirio and
Venustiano were happy because they smelt fish. He gave
her both hands to help her to her feet. At that moment
he couldn’t tell her he’d decided to go back to the States
without her. Antonio came running up and said that they’d
found his aunt and that she’d put them up and that every-
body in Vera Cruz was for the revolution.
    Going through the main square again Concha said she
was thirsty and wanted a drink. They were looking around
for an empty table outside of one of the cafes when they
caught sight of Salvador. He jumped to his feet and em-
braced Mac and cried, ^^Viva Obregon,” and they had a
mint julep American style. Salvador said that Carranza
had been murdered in the mountains by his own staff-

officers and that onearmed Obregon had ridden into Mex-
ico City dressed in white cotton like a peon wearing a big
peon hat at the head of his Yaqui Indians and that there’d
been no disorder and that the principles of Madero and
Juarez were to be reestablished and that a new era was
to dawn.

342
    They drank several mint juleps and Mac didn’t say
anything about going back to America.
   He asked Salvador where his friend, the chief of police,
was but Salvador didn’t hear him. Then Mac said to
Concha suppose he went back to America without her, but
she said he was only joking. She said she liked Vera Cruz
and would like to live there. Salvador said that great days
for Mexico were coming, that he was going back up the
next day. That night they all ate supper at Concha’s sis-

ter’s house. Mac furnished the cognac. They all drank to
the workers, to the tradeunions, to the partido laborista,
to the social revolution and the agraristas.
    Next morning Mac woke up early with a slight head
ache. He slipped out of the house alone and walked out
along the breakwater. He was beginning to think it was
silly to give up his bookstore like that. He went to the
Ward Line office and took his ticket back. The clerk re-
funded him the money and he got back to Concha’s sis-

ter’s house in time to have chocolate and pastry with them
for breakfast.


                                                                   PROTEUS


         Steinmetz was a hunchback,
son of a hunchback lithographer.
         He was born m Breslau in eighteen sixtyfive,
graduated with highest honors at seventeen from the
Breslau Gymnasium, went to the University of Breslau
to study mathematics 5
         mathematics to Steinmetz was muscular strength
and long walks over the hills and the kiss of a girl in
love and big evenings spent swilling beer with your
friends 5
         on his broken back he felt the topheavy weight
                                                                               325

343
of society the way workingmen felt it on their straight
backs, the way poor students felt it, was a member of
a socialist club, editor of a paper called The Peofle’s
Voice.



        Bismarck was sitting in Berlin like a big paper-
weight to keep the new Germany feudal, to hold down
the empire for his bosses the Hohenzollerns.
        Steinmetz had to run off to Zurich for fear of
                         at Zurich his mathematics woke up all
going to jail 5
the professors at the Polytechnic j
        but Europe in the eighties was no place for a pen-
niless German student with a broken back and a big
head filled with symbolic calculus and wonder about
electricity that is mathematics made power
        and a socialist at that.



        With a Danish friend he sailed for America steer-
age on an old French line boat La Champagne,
         lived in Brooklyn at first and commuted to Yon-
kers where he had a twelvedollar a week job with
Rudolph Eichemeyer who was a German exile from
fortyeight an inventor and electrician and owner of a
factory where he made hatmaking machinery and elec-
trical generators.
         In Yonkers he worked out the theory of the Third
Harmonics
         and the law of hysteresis which states in a formula
 the hundredfold relations between the metallic heat,
 density, frequency when the poles change places in the
 core of a magnet under an alternating current.
         It is Steinmetz’s law of hysteresis that makes pos-
 sible all the transformers that crouch in little boxes and
 gableroofed houses in all the hightenaon lines all over
         326

344
everywhere. The mathematical symbols of Stein-
metz’s law are the patterns of all transformers every-
where.



        In eighteen ninetytwo when Eichemeyer sold out
to the corporation that was to form General Electric,
Steinmetz was entered in the contract along with othei
valuable apparatus. All his life Steinmetz was a piece
of apparatus belonging to General Electric.
        First his laboratory was at Lynn, then it was
moved and the little hunchback with it to Schenectady,
the electric city.



        General Electric humored him, let him be a so-

cialist, let him keep a greenhouseful of cactuses lit up
by mercury lights, let him have alligators, talking
crows and a gila monster for pets and the publicity
department talked up the wizard, the medicine man
who knew the symbols that opened up the doors of AJ5
Baba’s cave.



         Steinmetz jotted a formula on his cuff and next
morning a thousand new powerplants had sprung up
and the dynamos sang dollars and the silence of the
 transformers was all dollars,
         and the publicity department poured oily stories
into the ears of the American public every Sunday and
 Steinmetz became the little parlor magician,
         who made a toy thunderstorm in his laboratory
 and made all the toy trains run on time and the meat
 stay cold in the icebox and the lamp in the parlor and
 the great lighthouses and the searchlights and the re-
 volving beams of light that guide airplanes at night
                                                                               327

345
towards Chicago, New York, St. Louis, Los Angeles,
        and they let him be a socialist and believe that
human society could be improved the way you can
improve a dynamo and they let him be pro-German
and write a letter offering his services to Lenin because
mathematicians are so impractical who make up for-
mulas by which you can build powerplants, factories,
subway systems, light, heat, air, sunshine but not
human relations that affect the stockholders’ money
and the directors’ salaries.



         Steinmetz was a famous magician and he talked to
Edison tapping with the Morse code on Edison’s knee
        because Edison was so very deaf
         and he went out West
         to make speeches that nobody understood
         and he talked to Bryan about God on a railroad
train
         and all the reporters stood round while he and
 Einstein
         met face to face,
         but they couldn’t catch what they said
         and Steinmetz was the most valuable piece of ap-
 paratus General Electric had
         until he wore out and died.



                                                                            JANEY


     The trip to Mexico and the private car the Mexican
 government put at the disposal of J. Ward Moorehouse
 to go back north in was lovely but a little tiresome, and it
 was so dusty going across the desert. Janey bought some
          328

346
very pretty things so cheap, some turquoise jewelry and
pink onyx to take home to Alice and her mother and
                                                                                    Ward
sisters as presents. Going up m the private car J.
kept her busy dictating and there was a big bunch of men
always drinking and smoking cigars and laughing at
smutty stories m the smokingroom or on the observation
platform. One of them was that man Barrow she’d done
some work for in Washington. He always stopped to talk
to her now and she didn’t like the way his eyes were when
he stood over her table talking to her, still he was an
interesting man and quite different from what she’d imag-
ined a laborleader would be like, and it amused her to
think that she knew about Queenie and how startled he’d
be if he knew she knew. She kidded him a good deal and
she thought maybe he was getting a crush on her, but he
was the sort of man who’d be like that with any woman
    They didn’t have a private car after Laredo and thc^

trip wasn’t so nice. They went straight through to Nev?
                                                                                    Ward
York. She had a lower in a different car from J.
and his friends, and in the upper berth there was a young
fellow she took quite a fancy to. His name was Buck
Saunders and he was from the panhandle of Texas and
talked with the funniest drawl. He’d punched cows and
worked in the Oklahoma oilfields and had saved up some
money and was going to see Washington City. He was
tickled to death when she said she was from Washington
and she told him all about what he ought to see, the
Capitol and the White House and the Lincoln Memorial
and the Washington Monument and the Old Soldiers’
Home and Mount Vernon. She said to be sure to go out
to Great Falls and told him about canoeing on the canal
and how she’d been caught in a terrible thunderstorn^
once near Cabin John’s Bridge. They ate several mealf
together in the dining car and he told her she was a dand^
girl aid awful easy to talk to and how he had a girl in
Tulsa^ Ok., and how he was going to get a job in Vene-*

                                                                               329

347
7Uthy down at Maracaibo in the oilfields because she’d
thrown him over to marry a rich dirtfarmer who struck
oil in his cowpasture. G. H. Barrow kidded Janey about
her fine handsome pickup and she said what about him
and the redheaded lady who got off in St. Louis, and they
laughed and she felt quite devilish and that G. H. Barrow
wasn’t so bad after all. When Buck got off the train in
Washington he gave her a snapshot of himself taken be-
side an oilderrick and said he’d write her every day and
would come to New York to see her if she’d let him, but
she never heard from him.
    She liked Morton, the cockney valet, too, because he
always spoke to her so respectfully. Every morning he’d
come and report on how J. Ward was feeling, ’E looks
pretty black this mornm’, Miss Williams,” or, ‘^’E was
whistlin’ while ’e was shavin’. Is ’e feelin’ goodf* ‘Rath-er.”
   When they got to the Pennsylvania Station, New York,
she had to stay with Morton to see that the box of files
was sent to the office at lOO Fifth Avenue and not out to
Long Island where J. Ward’s home was. She saw Morton
off in a Pierce Arrow that had come all the way in from
Great Neck to get the baggage, and went alone to the
office in a taxicab with her typewriter and the papers and
files. She felt scared and excited looking out of the taxicab
window at the tall white buildings and the round water-
tanks against the sky and the puffs of steam way up and
the sidewalks crowded with people and all the taxicabs and
trucks and the shine and jostle and clatter. She wondered
where she’d get a room to live, and how she’d find friends
and where she’d eat. It seemed terribly scary being all
alone In the big city like that and she wondered that she’d
had the nerve to come. She decided she’d try to find Alice
a job and that they’d take an apartment together, but
where would she go tonight?
    When she got to the office, everything seemed natural
and reassuring and so handsomely furnished and polished
        330

348
so bright and typewriters going so fast and much more stir
and bustle than tbere^d been in the offices of Dreyfus and
              but everybody looked Jewish and she was afraid
Carroll j
they wouldn’t like her and afraid she wouldn’t be able to
hold down the job.
   A girl named Gladys Compton showed her her desk,
that she said had been Miss Rosenthal’s desk. It was in
a little passage just outside J. Ward’s private office oppo-
site the door to Mr. Robbins’ office. Gladys Compton was
Jewish and was Mr. Robbins’ stenographer and said what
a lovely girl Miss Rosenthal had been and how sorry they
all were in the office about her accident and Janey felt
that she was stepping into a dead man’s shoes and would
have a stiff row to hoe. Gladys Compton stared at her with
resentful brown eyes that had a slight squint in them
when she looked hard at anything and said she hoped
she’d be able to get through the work, that sometimes the
work was simply killing, and left her.
                                                                    Ward came out
    When things were closing up at five, J.
of his private office. Janey was so pleased to see him stand-
.ng by her desk. He said he’d talked to Miss Compton
and asked her to look out for Janey a little at first and
that he knew it was hard for a young girl finding her way
around a new city, finding a suitable place to live and that
sort of thing, but that Miss Compton was a very nice girl
and would help her out and he was sure everything would
work out fine. He gave her a blue-eyed smile and handed
her a closely written packet of notes and said would she
mind coming in the office a little early in the morning and
having them all copied and on his desk by nine o’clock,
He wouldn’t usually ask her to do work like that but alj
the typists were so stupid and everything was in confusion
owing to his absence. Janey felt only too happy to do it
and warm all over from his smile.
    She and Gladys Compton left the office together.
Gladys Compton suggested that seeing as she didn’t know

                                                                               33 ^

349
the city hadn^t she better come home with her. She lived

in Flatbush with her father and mother and of course it
wouldn’t be what Miss Williams was accustomed to but
they had a spare room that they could let her have until
she could find her way around and that it was clean at

least and that was more than you could say about many
places. They went by the station to get her bag. Janey felt
relieved not to have to find her way alone in all that
crowd. Then they went down into the subway and got on
an expresstrain that was packed to the doors and Janey
didn’t think she could stand it being packed in close with
so many people. She thought she’d never get ^here and
the trains made so much noise in the tunnel she couldn’t
hear what the other girl was saying.
    At last they got out into a wide street with an elevated
running down it where the buildings were all one or two
stories and the stores were groceries and vegetable and
fruit stores. Gladys Compton said,            eat kosher, Miss
Williams, on account of the old people. I hope you don’t
             of course Benny—^Benny’s my brudder—and I
mind 5
haven't any prejudices.” Janey didn’t know what kosher
was but she said of course she didn’t mind and told the
other girl about how funny the food was down in Mexico,
so peppery you couldn’t hardly eat it.
    When they got to the house Gladys Compton began to
pronounce her words less precisely and was very kind and
thoughtful. Her father was a little old man with glasses
on the end of his nose and her mother was a fat pear-
shaped woman in a wig. They talked Yiddish among
themselves. They did everything they could to make
Janey comfortable and gave her a nice room and said
they’d give her board and lodging for ten dollars a week
as long as she wanted to stay and when she wanted to
 move she could go away and no hard feelings. The house
 was a yellow twofamily frame house on a long block of
 houses all exactly alike, but it was well heated and the bed

         332

350
was comfortable. The old man was a watchmaker and
worked at a Fifth Avenue jeweler^s. In the old country
their name had been Kompshchski but they said that in
New York nobody could pronounce it. The old man had
wanted to take the name of Freedman but his wife thought
Compton sounded more refined. They had a good supper
with tea in glasses and soup with dumplings and red caviar
and gefiiltefisch and Janey thought it was very nice know-
ing people like that. The boy Benny was still in high-
school, a gangling youth with heavy glasses who ate with
his head hung over his plate and had a rude way of con-
tradicting anything anybody said. Gladys said not to mind
him, that he was very good in his studies and was going
to study law. When the strangeness had worn off a little
Janey got to like the Comptons, particularly old Mn
Compton, who was very kind and treated everything that
happened with gentle heartbroken humor.
                                                                             Ward was
    The work at the office was so interesting. J.
beginning to rely on her for things. Janey felt it was going
to be a good year for her.
    The worst thing W’^as the threequarters of an hour ride
in the subway to Union Square mornings. Janey would
try to read the paper and to keep herself in a corner away
from the press of bodies. She liked to get to the office
feeling bright and crisp with her dress feeling neat and
her hair in nice order, but the long jolting ride fagged
her out, made her feel as if she wanted to get dressed and
take a bath all over again. She liked walking along Four-
teenth Street all garish and shimmery in the sunny early
morning dust and up Fifth Avenue to the office. She and
Gladys were always among the first to get in. Janey kept
 flowers on her desk and would sometimes slip in and put
a couple of roses in a silver vase on J. Ward’s broad ma-
 hogany desk. Then she’d sort the mail, lay his personal
 letters in a neat pile on the corner of the blotter-pad that
 was in a sort of frame of red illuminated Italian leather,

                                                                               333

351
read the other letters, look over his engagement book and
make up a small typewritten list of engagements, inter-
views, copy to be got out, statements to the press. She laid
the list in the middle of the blotter under a rawcopper
paperweight from the Upper Peninsula of Michigan,
checking off with a neat W. the items she could attend to
without consulting him.
   By the time she was back at her desk correcting the
spelling in the copy that had emanated from Mr. Rob-
bins^ ofHce the day before she began to feel a funny tingle
                                Ward would be coming in. She told
inside herj soon J,
herself it was all nonsense but every time the outer office
door opened she looked up expectantly. She began to
                         he might have had an accident driving in
worry a little 5
from Great Neck. Then when she’d given up expecting
him he’d walk hurriedly through with a quick smile all
around and the groundglass door of his private office
would close behind him. Janey would notice whether he
wore a dark or a light suit, what color his necktie was,
whether he had a fresh haircut or not. One day he had a
splatter of mud on the trouserleg of his blue serge suit
and she couldn’t keep her mind off it all morning trying
to think of a pretext to go in and tell him abour it. Rarely
he’d look at her directly with a flash of blue eyes as he
passed, or stop and ask her a question. Then she’d feel

fine.
    The work at the office was so interesting. It put her
right in the midst of headlines like when she used to talk
to Jerry Burnham back at Dreyfus and Carroll’s. There
was the Onondaga Salt Products account and literature
about bathsalts and chemicals and the employees’ baseball
team and cafeteria and old age pensions, and Marigold
Copper and combating subversive tendencies among the
miners who were mostly foreigners who had to be edu-
cated in the principles of Americanism, and the Citrus
Center Chamber of Commerce’s campaign to educate the

         334

352
small investors in the North in the stable building qualh
ties of the Florida fruit industry, and the slogan to be
launched, ^Tut an Alligator Pear on Every Breakfast
Table” for the Avocado Producers Cooperative. That con-
cern occasionally sent up a case so that everybody in the
office had an alligator pear to take home, except Mr. Rob-
bins who wouldn’t take his, but said they tasted like soap.
Now the biggest account of all was Southwestern Oi^
campaign to counter the insidious anti-American propa-
ganda of the British oilcompanies in Mexico and to op-
pose the intervention lobby of the Hearst interests in
Washington.
    In June Janey went to her sister Ellen’s wedding. It
was funny being in Washington again. Going on the train
Janey looked forward a whole lot to seeing Alice, but
when she saw her they couldn’t seem to find much to tall^
about. She felt out of place at her mother’s. Ellen was
marrying a law student at Georgetown University who
had been a lodger and the house was full of college boys
and young girls after the wedding. They all laughed and
giggled around and Mrs. Williams and Francie seemed
to enjoy it all right, but Janey was glad when it was time
for her to go down to the station and take the train to
New York again. When she said goodby to Alice she
didn’t say anything about her coming down to New York
to get an apartment.
    She felt pretty miserable on the train sitting in the
stuffy parlorcar looking out at towns and fields and sign-
boards. Getting back to the office the next morning was

like getting home.
    It was exciting in New York, The sinking of the Lusi-
tama had made everybody feel that America’s going into

the war was only a question of months. There were many

flags up on Fifth Avenue. Janey thought a great deal
about the war. She had a letter from Joe from Scotland

that he’d been torpedoed on the steamer Marchioness and

                                                                              335

353
that they’d been ten hours in an open boat in a snow-
storm off Pentland Firth with the current carrying them
out to sea, but that they’d landed and he was feeling fine
and that the crew had gotten bonuses and that he was
making big money anyway. When she’d read the letter
                                  Ward with a telegram that had just
she went in to see J.
:ome from Colorado and told him about her brother being
torpedoed and he was very much interested. He talked
about being patriotic and saving civilization and the his-

toric beauties of Rheims cathedral. He said he was ready
to do his duty when the time came, and that he thought
America’s entering the war was only a question of months.
   A very welldressed woman came often to see J. Ward.
Janey looked enviously at her lovely complexion and her
neat dresses, not ostentatious but very chic, and her mani-
cured nails and her tiny feet. One day the door swung
                                                                       Ward talking
open so that she could hear her and J.
familiarly together. ^^But, J.W., my darling,” she was say-
ing, “this office IS a fright. It’s the way they used to have
their offices in Chicago in the eaily eighties.” He was
laughing. “Well, Eleanor, why don’t you redecorate it
for me? Only the work would have to be done without
interfering with business. 1 can’t move, not with the press
of important business just now.”
    Janey felt quite indignant about it. The office was lovely
the way it was, quite distinctive, everybody said so. She
wondered who this woman was who was putting ideas into

J, Ward’s head. Next day when she had to make out a
check for two hundred and fifty dollars on account to
 Stoddard and Hutchins, Interior Decorators, she almost
spoke her mind, but after all it was hardly her business.
After that Miss Stoddard seemed to be around the office
all the time. The work was done at night so that every
morning when Janey came in, she found something
 changed. It was all being done over in black and white
 with curtains and upholstery of a funny claret-color. Janey

         336

354
didn’t like it at all but Gladys said it was in the modern
style and very interesting. Mr. Robbins refused to have
                                                                        Ward almost
his private cubbyhole touched and he and J.
had words about it, but in the end he had his own way
and the rumor went round that J. Ward had had to in-

crease his salary to keep him from going to another
agency.
    Labor Day Janey moved. She was sorry to leave the
Comptons but she’d met a middleaged woman named
Eliza Tingley who worked for a lawyer on the same floor
         Ward’s office. Eliza Tingley was a Baltimorean, had
as J.
passed a bar examination herself and Ja-ney said to herself

that she was a woman of the world. She and her twin

brother, who was a certified accountant, had taken a floor

of a house on West 23rd Street in the Chelsea district and
they asked Janey to come in with them. It meant being

free from the subway and Janey felt that the little walk

over to Fifth Avenue every morning would do her good.
The minute she’d seen Eliza Tingley in the lunchcounter

downstairs she’d taken a fancy to her. Things at the Ting-

 leys were free and easy and Janey felt at home there.

 Sometimes they had a drink in the evening. Eliza was a

 good cook and they’d take a long time over dinner and

 play a couple of rubbers of threehanded bridge before

 going to bed. Saturday night they’d almost always go to

 the theater. Eddy Tingley would get the seats at a cut-

 rate agency he knew. They subscribed to The Literary Di-

 gest and to The Century and The Ladies* Home Jomml
 and Sundays they had roast chicken or duck and read the
 magazine section of The New York Times.
     The Tingleys had a good many friends and they liked

 Janey and included her in everything and she felt that

 she was living the way she’d like to live. It was exciting

 too that winter with rumors of war all the time. They
 had a big map of Europe hung up on the livingroom wll
 and marked the portions of the Allied armies with little

                                                                                337

355
flags. They were heart and soul for the Allies and names
like Verdun or Chemin des Dames started little shivers
running down their spines, Eliza wanted to travel and
made Janey tell her over and over again every detail of
                                 they began to plan a trip abroad to-
her trip to Mexico 5
gether when the war was over and Janey began to save
money for it. When Alice wrote from Washington that
maybe she would pull up stakes in Washington and go
down to New York, Janey wrote saying that it was so
hard for a girl to get a job in New York just at present
and that maybe it wasn’t such a good idea.
   All that fall J. Ward’s face looked white and drawn.
He got in the habit of coming into the office Sunday after-
noons and Janey was only too glad to run around there
after dinner to help him out. They’d talk over the events
                                                    Ward would dictate a lot
t)f the week in the office and J.
of private letters to her and tell her she was a treasure
and leave her there typing away happily. Janey was wor-
ried too. Although new accounts came in all the time the
firm wasn’t in a very good financial condition. J. Ward
had made some unfortunate plunges in the Street and was
having a hard time holding things together. He was
anxious to buy out the large interest still held by old Mrs.
Staple and talked of notes his wife had gotten hold of and
that he was afraid his wife would use unwisely. Janey
could see that his wife was a disagreeable peevish woman
trying to use her mother’s money as a means of keeping
a hold on J. Ward. She never said anything to the
                                 Ward personally, but she talked a
Tingleys about J.
great deal about the business and they agreed with her
that the work was so interesting. She was looking forward
                                                  Ward had hinted that he
to this Christmas because J.
would give her a raise.
    A rainy Sunday afternoon she was typing off a confi-
dential letter to Judge Planet inclosing a pamphlet from
a detective agency describing the activities of labor agi-

         338

356
                                                                           Ward wa*
tators among the Colorado miners, and J.
walking up and down in front of the desk staring with
bent brows at the polished toes of his shoes when there
was a knock on the outer office door. wonder who that
could be?” said J. Ward. There was something puzzled
and nervous about the way he spoke. “It may be Mr.
Robbins forgotten his key,” said Janey. She went to see.
When she opened the door Mrs. Moorehouse brushed
past her. She wore a wet slicker and carried an umbrella,
her face was pale and her nostrils were twitching. Janey
closed the door gently and went to her own desk and sat
down. She was worried. She took up a pencil and started
drawing scrolls round the edge of a piece of typewriter
paper. She couldn^t help hearing what was going on in

J. Ward’s private office. Mrs. Moorehouse had shot in
slamming the groundglass door behind her. “Ward, I
can’t stand it ... I won’t stand it another minute,” she
was screaming at the top of her voice. Janey’s heart started
beating very fast. She heard J. Ward’s voice low and con-
ciliatory, then Mrs. Moorehouse’s. “I won’t be treated
like that, I tell you. I’m not a child to be treated like
that  . .   . You’re taking advantage of my condition. My
health won’t stand being treated like that.”
   “Now look here, Gertrude, on my honor as a gentle-
               Ward was saying. “There’s nothing in it, Ger-
man,” J.
trude. You lie there in bed imagining things and you
shouldn’t break in like this. I’m a very busy man. I have
important transactions that demand my complete atten-
tion.”
   Of course it’s outrageous, Janey was saying to herself.
   “You’d still be in Pittsburgh working for Bessemer
Products, Ward, if it wasn’t for me and you know it , . .
You may despise me but you don’t despise dad’s money

. .  . but I’m through, I tell you. I’m going to start
divorce . . “But, Gertrude, you know very well there’s
no other woman in my life.” “How about this woman

                                                                              339

357
y^ou^re seen round with all the time .          . . what’s he^
name .  .  . Stoddard? You see^ I know more than you
think . .    . I’m not the kind of woman you think I am,
Ward. You can’t make a fool of me, do you hear?”
    Mrs. Moorehouse’s voice rose into a rasping shriek.
Then she seemed to break down and Janey could hear her
sobbing, ^^Now, Gertrude,” came Ward’s voice soothingly,
^^you’ve gotten yourself all wrought up over nothing    . . .
Eleanor Stoddard and I have had a few business deal-
ings . . . She’s a bright woman and I find her stimulat-
ing .   .  . intellectually, you understand . . . We’ve oc-
casionally eaten dinner together, usually with mutual
fnends, and that’s absolutely . . .” Then his voice sunk
so low that Janey couldn’t hear what he was saying. She
began to think she ought to slip out. She didn’t know
what to do.
    She’d half gotten to her feet when Mrs. Moorehouse’s
/oice soared to a hysterical shriek again. “Oh, you’re cold
as a fish .   .  . You’re just a fish. I’d like you better if it
was true, if you were having an affair with her . .         . But
I don’t care, I won’t be used as a tool to use dad’s money.”
The door of the private office opened and Mrs. Moore-
house came out, gave Janey a bitter glare as if she sus-
                                                  Ward too, and went out.
pected her relations with J.
Janey sat down at her desk again trying to look uncon-
                                                                                    Ward
cerned. Inside the private office she could hear J.
striding up and down with a heavy step. When he called
her his voice sounded weak:
    “Miss Williams.”
    She got up and went into the private office with her
pencil and pad in one hand. J. Ward started to dictate as
d nothing had happened but half way through a letter to
f:he president of the Ansonia Carbide Corporation he sud-
denly said, “Oh, hell,” and gave the wastebasket a kick
that sent it spinning against the wall.
    “Excuse jne, Miss Williamsj I’m very m\ich worried

         340

358
. .   . Miss WilliamSj Pm sure I can trust you not to mem
tion it to a soul ... You understand, my wife is not quite
               she^s been ill .     .   . the last baby . . you know
herself j                                                                      .
those things sometimes happen to women.”
    Janey looked up at him. Tears had started into her eyes.
^^Oh, Mr. Moorehouse, how can you think Pd not under-
stand    . . . Oh, it must be dreadful for you, and this is
a great work and so interesting.” She couldn’t say any
more. Her lips couldn’t form any words. ^^Miss Wil-
                    Ward was saying,            .  .
liams,” J.                                                     , er . . , appreciate

. . . er.” Then he picked up the wastepaper basket. Janey
jumped up and helped him pick up the crumpled papers
and trash that had scattered over the floor. His face was
flushed from stooping. ^^Grave responsibilities . . . Irre-
sponsible woman may do a hell of a lot of damage, you
understand.” Janey nodded and nodded. ^^Well, where
were we? Let’s finish up and get out of here.”
    They set the wastebasket under the desk and started in
on the letters again.
    All the way home to Chelsea, picking her way through
the slush and pools of water on the streets, Janey was
thinking of what she’d liked to have said to J. Ward to
make him understand that everybody in the office would
stand by him whatever happened.
    When she got in the apartment, Eliza Tingley said a
man had called her up. “Sounded like a rather rough
typej wouldn’t give his namej just said to say Joe had
called up and that he’d call up again.” Janey felt Eliza’s
eyes on her inquisitively.
    “That’s my brother Joe, I guess  . . He’s a . . . he’s
in the merchant marine.”
    Some friends of the Tingleys came in, they had two
tables of bridge and were having a very jolly evening
when the telephone rang again, and it was Joe. Janey felt
herself blushing as she talked to him. She couldn’t ask
him up and still she wanted to see him. The others wer^

                                                                                       341

359
calling to her to play her hand. He said he had just got
in and that he had some presents for her and he’d been
clear out to Flatbush and that the yids there had told him
she lived in Chelsea now and he was in the cigar store at
the corner of Eighth Avenue. The others were calling to
her to play her hand. She found herself saying that she
was very busy doing some work and wouldn’t he meet her
at five tomorrow at the office building where she worked.
She asked him again how he was and he said^ ^Tine/’ but
he sounded disappointed. When she went back to her table
they all kidded her about the boyfriend and she laughed
and blushedj but inside she felt mean because she hadn’t
asked him to come up.
    Next evening it snowed. When she stepped out of the
elevator crowded to the doors at five o’clock she looked
eagerly round the vestibule. Joe wasn’t there. As she was
saying goodnight to Gladys she saw him through the
door. He was standing outside with his hands deep m the
pockets of a blue peajacket. Big blobs of snowflakes spun
round his face that looked lined and red and weather-
beaten.
    ^^Hello, Joe,” she said.
    '‘Hello, Janey.”
    "When did you get in?”
    "A couple a days ago.”
    "Are you in good shape, Joe? How do you feeP”
    "I gotta rotten head today . .     . Got stinkin’ last night.”
    "Joe, I was so sorry about last night but there were
a lot of people there and I wanted to see you alone so we
could talk.”
   Joe grunted.
   "That’s awright, Jancy .      . . Gee, you’re lookin’ swell.
If any of the guys saw me with you they’d think Pd
picked up somethin’ pretty swell awright.”
   Janey felt uncomfortable. Joe had on heavy work-
sffioes and there were splatters of gray paint on his trouser-

        342

360
legs. He had a package wrapped in newspaper under his
arm.
    ^^Let^s go eat somewheres . . . Jez, Pm sorry Pm not
rigged up better. We lost all our duffle, see, when we wa^
torpedoed.”
    “Were you torpedoed again?”
    Joe laughed, “Sure, right off Cape Race. It^s a great
life . . . Well, that’s strike two ... I brought along
your shawl though, by God if I didn’t ... I know
                            we’ll eat at Liichow’s.”
where we’ll eat 5
   “Isn’t Fourteenth Street a little . .
    “Naw, they got a room for ladies . . . Janey, you
don’t think I’d take you to a dump wasn’t all on the up
an’ up?”
    Crossing Union Square a seedylooking young man in a
red sweater said, “Hi, Joe.” Joe dropped back of Jamy
for a minute and he and the young man talked with their
heads together. Then Joe slipped a bill in his hand, said,
“So long, Tex,” and ran after Janey who was walking
along feeling a little uncomfortable. She didn’t like Four-
teenth Street after dark. “Who was that, Joe?” “Some
damn AB or other. I knew him down New Orleans . .         .

I call him Tex. I don’t know what his name is      .  .  . He’s
down on his uppers.” “Were you down m New Orleans
Joe nodded. “Took a load a molasses out on the Henry
B. Higginbotham .    . . Piginbottom we called her. Well,
she’s layin’ easy now on the bottom awright ... on the
bottom of the Grand Banks.”
   When they went in the restaurant the headwaiter
looked at them sharply and put them at a table in the
corner of a little inside room. Joe ordered a big meal and
some beer, but Janey didn’t like beer so he had to drink
hers too. After Janey had told him all the news about the
famiN and how she liked her job and expected a raise
Christmas and was so happy living with the Tingleys who
were so lovely to her, there didn’t seem to be much to say.

                                                                              343

361
Joe had bought tickets to the Hippodrome but they had
plenty of time before that started. They sat silent over
their coffee and Joe puffed at a cigar. Janey finally said

it was a shame the weather was so mean and that it must
be terrible for the poor soldiers in the trenches and she
thought the Huns were just too barbarous and the Lusi-
tania and how silly the Ford peace ship idea was. Joe
laughed in the funny abrupt way he had of laughing now,
and said: “Pity the poor sailors out at sea on a night like

this.^^ He got up to get another cigar.
    Janey thought what a shame it was he’d had his neck
                                                    his neck was red and had
shaved when he had a haircut j
little wrinkles in it and she thought of the rough life he
must be leading and when he came back she asked him
why he didn’t get a different job. “You mean in a ship-
yard'^ They’re making big money in shipyards, but hell,
Janey, I’d rather knock around . . . It’s all for the expe-
rience, as the feller said when they blew his block off.”
“No, but there are boys not half so bright as you are with
nice clean jobs right in my office . . . and a future to look
forward to.”
    “All my future’s behind me,” said Joe with a laugh.
“Might go down to Perth Amboy get a job m a munitions
factory, but I rather be biowed up in the open, see^”
    Janey went on to talk about the war and how she wished
we were in it to save civilization and poor little helpless
Belgium. “Can that stuff, Janey,” said Joe. He made a
cutting gesture with his big red hand above the tablecloth.
“You people don’t understand it, see .         . . The whole
damn war’s crooked from start to finish. Why don’t they
torpedo any French Line boats? Because the Frogs have
it all set with the Jerries, see, that if the Jerries leave their
boats alone they won’t shell the German factories back of
the front. What we wanta do ’s sit back and sell ’em
munitions and let ’em blow ’emselves to hell. An’ those
babies are makin’ big money in Bordeaux and Toulouse or

         344

362
Marseilles while their own kin are shootin’ daylight into
each other at the front, and it’s the same thing with the
limeys .   . . Pm tellin’ ye, Janey, this war’s crooked, like
every other goddam thing.”
    Janey started to cry. “Well, you needn’t curse and swear
all the time.” “Pm sorry, sister,” said Joe humbly, “but
I’m just a bum an’ that’s about the size of it an’ not fit
to associate with a nicedressed girl like you.” “No, I didn’t
mean that,” said Janey, wiping her eyes.
    “Gee, but I forgot to show you the shawl.” He un-
wrapped the paper package. Two Spanish shawls spilled
out on the table, one of black lace and the other green silk
embroidered with big flowers. “Oh, Joe, you oughtn’t to
give me both of them .   . . You ought to give one to your
best girl.” “The kinda girls I go with ain’t fit to have
things like that ... I bought those for you, Janey.”
Janey thought the shawls were lovely and decided she’d
give one of them to Eliza Tingley.
    They went to the Hippodrome but they didn’t have a
very good time. Janey didn’t like shows like that much
and Joe kept falling asleep. When they came out of the
theater it was bitterly cold. Gritty snow was driving hard
down Sixth Avenue almost wiping the “L” out of sight.
Joe took her home in a taxi and left her at her door with
an abrupt, “So long, Janey.” She stood a moment on the
step with her key in her hand and watched him walking
west towards Tenth Avenue and the wharves, with his
head sunk in his peajacket.
   That winter the flags flew every day on Fifth Avenue.
Janey read the paper eagerly at breakfast; at the office
there was talk of German spies and submarines and atroci-
ties and propaganda. One morning a French military mis-
sion came to call on J. Ward, handsome pale officers with
blue uniforms and red trousers and decorations. The
youngest of them was on crutches. They’d all of them

363
been severely wounded at the front. When theyM left,
Janey and Gladys almost had words because Gladys said
ofEcers were a lot of lazy loafers and she’d rather see a
mission of private soldiers. Janey wondered if she oughtn’t
                Ward about Gladys’s pro-Germanism, whether
to tell J,
it mightn’t be her patriotic duty. The Comptons might be
          weren’t they going under an assumed name'^ Benny
spies 3
was a socialist or worse, she knew that. She decided she’d
keep her eyes right open.
    The same day G. H. Barrow came in. Janey was in the
private ofEce with them all the time. They talked about
President Wilson and neutrality and the stockmarket and
the delay in transmission in the Lusitmta note. G. H.
Barrow had had an interview with the president. He was
a member of a committee endeavoring to mediate between
the railroads and the Brotherhoods that were threatening

3L strike, Janey liked him better than she had on the pri-
vate car coming up from Mexico, so that when he met her
m the hall just as he was leaving the oifice she was quite
glad to talk to him and when he asked her to come out to
dinner with him, she accepted and felt very devilish.
    All the time G. H. Barrow was in New York he took
Janey out to dinner and the theater. Janey had a good
time and she could always kid him about Queenie if he
tried to get too friendly going home in a taxi. He couldn’t
make out where she’d found out about Queenie and he
told her the whole story and how the woman kept hound-
ing him for money, but he said that now he was divorced
 Erom his wife and there was nothing she could do. After
 making Janey swear she’d never tell a soul, he explained
that through a legal technicality he’d been married to two
women at the same time and that Queenie was one of
them and that now he’d divorced them both, and there
was nothing on earth Queenie could do but the news-
papers were always looking for dirt and particularly liked

         346

364
to get something on a liberal like himself devoted to thti
cause of labor. Then he talked about the art of life and
said American women didn^t understand the art of lifej at
least women like Queenie didn’t. Janey felt very sorry for
him but when he asked her to marry him she laughed and
said she really would have to consult counsel before reply-
ing. He told her all about his life and how poor he’d been
as a boy and then about jobs as stationagent and freight-
agent and conductor and the enthusiasm with which he’d
gone into work for the Brotherhood and how his muck-
raking articles on conditions in the railroads had made him
a name and money so that all his old associates felt he’d
sold outj but that, so help me, it wasn’t true. Janey went
home and told the Tingleys all about the proposal, only
she was careful not to say anything about Queenie or
bigamy, and they all laughed and joked about it and it
made Janey feel good to have been proposed to by such
an important man and she wondered why it was such in-
teresting men always fell for her and regretted they
always had that dissipated look, but she didn’t know
whether she wanted to marry G. H. Barrow or not.
   At the office next morning, she looked him up in Whoh
Who and there he was, Barrow, George Henry, fuhUcist

.  . . but she didn’t think she could ever love him. At the
office that day J. Ward looked very worried and sick and
Janey felt so sorry for him and quite forgot about G. H.
                                                                                   Ward
Barrow, She was called into a private conference J.
was having with Mr. Robbins and an Irish lawyer named
O’Grady, and they said did she mind if they rented a safe
deposit box in her name to keep certain securities in and
started a private account for her at the Bankers Trust.
They were forming a new corporation. There were busi-
ness reasons why something of the sort might become
                                                     Ward would own more
imperative. Mr. Robbins and J.
than half the stock of a new concern and would work for

                                                                              347

365
it on a salary basis. Mr. Robbins looked very worried and
a little drunk and kept lighting cigarettes and forgetting
them on the edge of the desk and kept saying, ^^You know
very well, J. W., that anything you do is O.K. by me.”
    Ward explained to Janey that she’d be an ofEcer of the
J.
new corporation but of course would in no way be per-
sonally liable. It came out that old Mrs. Staple was suing
    Ward to recover a large sum of money and that his wife
J.
had started divorce proceedings in Pennsylvania and that
she was refusing to let him go home to see the children
and that he was living at the McAlpin,
    ^^Gertrude’s lost her mind,” said Mr. Robbins genially.
Then he slapped J. Ward on the back. ^^Looks like the fat
was in the fire now,” he roared. ^Well, I’m goin’ out to
            a man must eat . . . and drink . . . even if he’s
lunch 5
                                          Ward scowled and said nothing
a putative bankrupt.” J.
and Janey thought it was in very bad taste to talk like that
 and so loud too.
    When she went home that evening she told the Ting-
 leys that she was going to be a director of the new cor-
 poration and they thought it was wonderful that she was
 getting ahead so fast and that she really ought to ask for
 a raise even if business was in a depressed state. Janey
 smiled, and said, ^^All in good time.” On the way home
 she had stopped in the telegraph office on Twentythird
 Street and wired G. H. Barrow, who had gone up to
 Washington: let’s just be friends.
     Eddy Tingley brought out a bottle of sherry and at
 dinner he and Eliza drank a toast, ^^To the new execu-
 tive,” and Janey blushed crimson and was very pleased
 Afterwards they played a rubber of dummy bridge.





          348

366
                            THE CAMERA EYE (26)


       the garden was crowded and outside Madison Square

Was full of cops that made everybody move on and the

bombsquad all turned out

       we couldn^t get a seat so we ran up the stairs to the top

gallery and looked down through the blue air at the faces

thick as gravel and above them on the speakers^ stand tiny

black figures and a man was speaking and whenever he said

war there were hisses and whenever he said Russia there

was clapping on account of the revolution I didn^t know

who was speaking somebody said Max Eastman and some-

body said another guy but we clapped and yelled for the

revolution and hissed for Morgan and the capitalist war

and there was a dick looking into our faces as if h6 was

trying to remember them

       then we went to hear Emma Goldman at the Bronx

Casino but the meeting was forbidden and the streets

around were very crowded and there were moving vans

moving through the crowd and they said the moving vans

were full of cops with machineguns and there were little

policedepartment Fords with searchlights and they charged

the crowd with the Fords and the searchlights          every-

body talked machineguns revolution civil liberty freedonr

of speech but occasionally somebody got into the way of

E cop and was beaten up and shoved into a patrol wagon

                                                                              349

367
and the cops were scared and they said they were calling

out the fire department to disperse the crowd and every-

body said it was an outrage and what about Washington

and Jefferson and Patrick Henry?

       afterwards we went to the Brevoort it was much

nicer everybody who was anybody was there and there

was Emma Goldman eating frankfurters and sauerkraut

and everybody looked at Emma Goldman and at every-

body else that was anybody and everybody was for peace

and the cooperative commonwealth and the Russian revo-

lution and we talked about red flags and barricades and

suitable posts for machineguns

        and we had several drinks and welsh rabbits and paid

our bill and went home, and opened the door with a

latchkey and put on pajamas and went to bed and it was

comfortable in bed



                                              NEWSREEL XVIII


            Goodby Ptccadillyy farewell Leicester Square
            It^s a long long way to Tifferary
      WOMAN TRAPS HUSBAND WITH GIRL IN
                                        HOTEL

        to such a task we can dedicate our lives
        and our fortunes, everything that we are,
        and everything that we have, with the pride of those
 who know
          "50

368
        that the day has come when America is privileged to
spend her
        blood and her might for the principles that gave her birth
        and happiness and the peace that she has treasured. God
        helping her she can do no other

                         It^s a long way to Tiffed ary
                         It^s a long way to go
                         It^s a long way to Tifferary
                         And the sweetest girl I know

                           TRAITORS BEWARE

        four men in Evanston fined for killing birds

                   WILSON WILL FORCE DRAFT

        food gamblers raise price of canned foods move for dry
U S in war files charges when men ignore national air

                    JOFFRE ASKS TROOPS NOW
        Mooney case incentive

            Goodby Ptccadilly^ jarewell Leicester Square
            IPs a long long way to Tifferary
            But my hearPs right there,

          HOUSE REFUSES TO ALLOW T R TO RAISE TROOPS

        the American Embassy was threatened today with ar
attack by a mob of radical socialists led by Nicolai Lenin an
exile who recently returned from Switzerland via Germany

          ALLIES TWINE FLAGS ON TOMB OF WASHINGTON



                                   ELEANOR STODDARD


    Eleanor thought that things were very exciting that
winter. She and J.W. went out a great deal together, to

                                                                                       351

369
all the French operas and to first nights. There was a little
French restaurant where they ate hors d’oeuvres way east
in Fiftysixth Street. They went to see French paintings
in the galleries up Madison Avenue. J.W. began to get
interested in art, and Eleanor loved going round with
him because he had such a romantic manner about every-
thing and he used to tell her she was his inspiration and
that he always got good ideas when he’d been talking to
her. They often talked about how silly people were who
Baid that a man and a woman couldn’t have a platonic
friendship. They wrote each other little notes in French
every day. Eleanor often thought it was a shame J.W. had
iuch a stupid wife who was an invalid too, but she thought
that the children were lovely and it was nice that they
both had lovely blue eyes like their father.
    She had an office now all by herself and had two girls
Working with her to learn the business and had quite a
lot of work to do. The office was in the first block above
Madison Square on Madison Avenue and she just had her
own name on it. Eveline Hutchins didn’t have anything
to do with it any more as Dr. Hutchins had retired and
the Hutchinses had all moved out to Santa Fe. Eveline
sent her an occasional box of Indian curios or pottery and
the watercolors the Indian children did in the schools, and
Eleanor found they sold very well. In the afternoon she’d
ride downtown in a taxi and look up at the Metropolitan
Life tower and the Flatiron Building and the lights
against the steely Manhattan sky and think of crystals and
artificial flowers and gilt patterns on indigo and claret-
colored brocade.
    The maid would have tea ready for her and often there
would be friends waiting for her, young architects or
painters. There’d always be flowers, calla lilies with the
texture of icecream or a bowl of freesias. She’d talk a
while and before slipping off to dress for dinner. When
 J.W. phoned that he couldn’t come she’d feel very bad.

         3^2

370
If there was still anybody there who’d come to tea she’d
ask him to stay and have potluck with her.
   The sight of the French flag excited her always or when
a band played Tifferary; and one evening when they
were going to see The Yelhw Jacket for the third
time, she had on a new fur coat that she was wondering
how she was going to pay for, and she thought of all the
bills at her office and the house on Sutton Place she was
remodeling on a speculation and wanted to ask J.W.
about a thousand he’d said he’d invested for her and won-
dered if there’d been any turnover yet. They’d been talk-
ing about the air raids and poison gas and the effect of
the war news downtown and the Bowmen of Mons and
'he Maid of Orleans and she said she believed in the
cupernatural, and J.W. was hinting something about re-
verses on the Street and his face looked drawn and wor-
          but they were crossing Times Square through the
ried j
eighto’clock crowds and the skysigns flashing on and oflf«
The fine little triangular men were doing exercises on the
Wrigley sign and suddenly a grindorgan began to play
The Marseillaise and it was too beautiful, she burst into
tears and they talked about Sacrifice and Dedication and
J.W. held her arm tight through the fur coat and gave
the organgrinder man a dollar. When they got to the
theater Eleanor hurried down to the ladies’ room to see

if her eyes had got red. But when she looked in the mirror
they weren’t red at all and there was a flash of heartfelt
feeling in her eyes, so she just freshened up her face and
went back up to the lobby, where J-W. was waiting for
her with the tickets in his hand^ her gray eyes were flash-
ing and had tears in them.
    Then one evening J.W. looked very worried indeed
 and said when he was taking her home bx>m the opera
 where they’d seen Mamon that his wife didn’t under-
 stand their relations and was making scenes and threaten-
 ing to divorce him. Eleanor was Indignant and said sh^

                                                                               353

371
must have a very coarse nature not to understand that
t-heir relations were pure as driven snow. J.W. said she
had and that he was very worried and he explained that
most of the capital invested in his agency was his mother-
in-law’s and that she could bankrupt him if she wanted
to, which was much worse than a divorce. At that Eleanor
felt very cold and crisp and said that she would rather
go out of his life entirely than break up his home and
that he owed something to his lovely children. J.W. said
she was his inspiration and he had to have her in his life
and when they got back to Eighth Street they walked
back and forth in Eleanor’s white glittering drawing-
room in the heavy smell of lilies wondering what could
be done. They smoked many cigarettes but they couldn’t
seem to come to any decision. When J.W. left he said
with a sigh, ^^She may have detectives shadowing me this
very minute,” and he went away very despondent.
    After he’d gone Eleanor walked back and forth in front
Df the long Venetian mirror between the windows. She
didn’t know what to do. The decorating business was
barely breaking even. She had the amortization to pay
off on the house on Sutton Place. The rent of her apart-
ment was two months overdue and there was her fur coat
^o pay for. She’d counted on the thousand dollars’ worth
of shares J.W. had said would be hers if he made the
felling he expected in that Venezuela Oil stock. Something
must have gone wrong or else he would have spoken of

It. When Eleanor went to bed she didn’t sleep. She felt
very miserable and lonely. She’d have to go back to the
drudgery of a department store. She was losing her looks
and her friends and now if she had to give up J.W. it
would be terrible. She thought of her colored maid
Augustine with her unfortunate loves that she always
told Eleanor about and she wished she’d been like that.
Maybe she’d been wrong from the start to want every-
thing so justright and beautiful. She didn’t cry but she

         354

372
lay all night with her eyes wide and smarting staring at
the flowered molding round the ceiling that she could see

in the light that filtered m from the street through hei
lavender tulle curtains.
    A couple of days later at the office she was looking a),
some antique Spanish chairs an old furniture dealer was
trying to sell her when a telegram came, disagreeable
DEVELOPMENTS MUST SEE YOU INADVISABLE USE TELE-
PHONE MEET ME TEA FIVE OCLOCK PRINCE GEORGE HOTEL

It wasn^t signed. She told the man to leave the chairs and
when hey gone stood a long time looking down at a pot

of lavender crocuses with yellow pistils she had on her
desk She was wondering if it would do any good if she
went out to Great Neck and talked to Gertrude Moore-
house. She called Miss Lee who was making up some cur-

tains in the other room and asked her to take charge of
the office and that she’d phone during the afternoon.
    She got into a taxi and went up to the Pennsylvania

Station. It was a premature Spring day. People were walk-
ing along the street with their overcoats unbuttoned. The
sky was a soft mauve with frail clouds like milkweed floss.

In the smell of furs and overcoats and exhausts and
bundledup bodies came an unexpected scent of birchbark.
Eleanor sat bolt upright in the back of the taxi driving
her sharp nails into the palms of her graygloved hands.
She hated these treacherous days when winter felt like

Spring. They made the lines come out on her face, made
everything seem to crumble about her, there seemed to
be no firm footing any more. She^d go out and talk to
Gertrude Moorehouse as one woman to another. A scandal
would ruin everything. If she talked to her a while she’d
 make her realize that there had never been anything
between her and J.W. A divorce scandal would ruin
everything. She’d lose her clients and have to go intc
lani^uptcy and the only thing to do would be to go back

 to Pullman to live with her uncle and aunt.

                                                                               355

373
    She paid the taximan and went down the stairs to the
Long Island Railroad. Her knees were shaky and she felt
desperately tired as she pushed her way through the
crowd to the information desk. No, she couldn^t get a train
to Great Neck till 2:13. She stood in line a long time for
a ticket. A man stepped on her foot. The hne of people
moved maddeningly slowly past the ticketwindow. When
she got to the window it was several seconds before she
could remember the name of the place she wanted a ticket
for. The man looked at her through the window, with
peevish shoebutton eyes. He wore a green eyeshade and
his lips were too red for his pale face. The people behind
were getting impatient. A man with a tweed coat and a
heavy suitcase was already trying to brush past her. “Great
Neck and return.” As soon as sheM bought the ticket the
thought came to her that she wouldn^t have time to get
out there and back by five o’clock. She put the ticket in
her gray silk purse that had a little design in jet on it. She
thought of kilhng herself. She would take the subway
downtown and go up in the elevator to the top of the
Woolworth Building and throw herself off.
    Instead she went out to the taxistation. Russet sunlight
was pouring through the gray colomade, the blue smoke
of exhausts rose into it crinkled like watered silk. She got
into a taxi and told the driver to take her round Central
Park. Some of the twigs were red and there was a glint
on the long buds of beeches but the grass was still brown
and there were piles of dirty snow in the gutters. A
shivery raw wind blew across the ponds. The taximan
kept talking to her. She couldn’t catch what he said and
got tired of making random answers and told him to leave
her at the Metropolitan Art Museum. While she was pay-
 ing him a newsboy ran by crying “ExtraP’ Eleanor bought
 a paper for a nickel and the taximan bought a paper. “I’ll
be a soBOva .       she heard the taximan exclaim, but she
 ran up the steps fast for fear she^d have to talk to him.

374
           y





When she got in the quiet silvery light of the musuem
she opened up the paper. A rancid smell of printer’s ink
came from it, the ink was still sticky and came off on
her gloves.
                             DECLARATION OF WAR
   A matter of hours now Washington Observers declare.
    German note thoroughly unsatisfactory.
    She left the newspaper on a bench and went to look at
the Rodins. After she’d looked at the Rodins she went to
the Chinese wing. By the time she was ready to go down
Fifth Avenue in the bus—she felt she’d been spending too
much on taxis—she felt elated. All the way downtown she
kept remembering the Age of Bronze. When she made
out J.W. in the stuffy pinkish light of the hotel lobby she
went towards him with a springy step. His jaw was set
and his blue eyes were on fire. He looked younger than

last time she’d seen him. ^^Well, it’s come at last,” he
said.       just wired Washington offering my services to
the government. I’d like to see ’em try and. pull a rail-
road strike now.” ^^It’s wonderful and terrible^” said
Eleanor. “I’m trembling like a leaf.”
    They went to a little table in the corner behind some
heavy draperies to have tea. They had hardly sat down
before the orchestra started playing The Star-Sfangled
Banner and they had to get to their feet. There was great
bustle in the hotel. People kept running about with fresh
editions of the papers^ laughing and talking loud. Per-
fect strangers borrowed each other’s newspapers, chatted
about the war, lit cigarettes for each other.
    “I have an idea, J.W.,” Eleanor was saying, holding
a piece of cinnamontoast poised in her pointed fingers,

-^that if I went out and talked to your wife as one woman
 to another, she’d understand the situation better. When
 I was decorating the house she was so kind and we got
along famously.”

                                                                               357

375
        have offered my services to Washington,” said Ward.
^^There may be a telegram at the office now. Pm sure
that Gertrude will see that it is her simple duty.”
        want to go, J.W.,” said Eleanor. “I feel I must go.”
   'Where?”
    "To France.”
    "Don^t do anything hasty, Eleanor.”
    "No, I feel I must ... I could be a very good nurse

.  .  . I’m not afraid of anything^ you ought to know
that, J.W.”
    The orchestra played The Stm'-Sfangled Bmner again ^
Eleanor sang some of the chorus in a shrill little treble
voice. They were too excited to sit still long and went
over to J.W.’s office in a taxi. The office was in great
excitement. Miss Williams had had a flagpole put up in
the center window and was just raising the flag on it.
Eleanor went over to her and they shook hands warmly.
The cold wind was rustling the papers on the desk and
typewritten pages were sailing across the room but nobody
paid any attention. Down Fifth Avenue a band was com-
ing near playing Haily Hady the Ganges All Here. All
along office windows were brightly lit, flags were slap-
ping against their poles in the cold wind, clerks and
stenographers were leaning out and cheering, dropping
 out papers that sailed and whirled in the bitter eddying
 wind.
    "It’s the Seventh Regiment,” somebody said and they
all clapped and yelled. Thq band was clanging loud under
 the window. They could hear the tramp of the militia-
 men’s feet. All the automobiles in the stalled traffic tooted
 their horns. People on the tops of the busses were waving
 small flags. Miss Williams leaned over and kissed Eleanor
 on the cheek. J.W. stood by looking out over their heads
 with a proud smile on his face.
     After the band had gone and traffic was running again
 they put the window down and Miss Williams went

          358

376
 around picking up and arranging loose papers. J.W
 a telegram from Washington accepting his services oi?
 the Public Information Committee that Mr. Wilson was
 gathering about him and said he’d leave in the morning.
 He called up Great Neck and asked Gertrude if he could
come out to dinner and bring a friend. Gertrude said he
 might and that she hoped she’d be able to stay up to see
them. She was excited by the warnews but she said the
thought of all that misery and slaughter gave her horrible
pains in the back of the head.
    “I have a hunch that if I take you out to dinner at
Gertrude’s everything will be all right,” he said to
Eleanor. ^^I’m rarely wrong in my hunches.”
    ^^Oh, I know she’ll understand,” said Eleanor.
    As they were leaving the office they met Mr. Robbins
in the hall. He didn’t take his hat off or the cigar out of
his mouth. He looked drunk. ^^What the hell is this,
Ward?” he said. ^^Are we at war or not?”
    ^^If we’re not we will be before morning,” said J.W
    “It’s the goddamnedest treason in history,” said Mr.
Robbins. “What did we elect Wilson for instead of Old
Fuzzywhiskers except to keep us out of the goddam
mess?”
    “Robbins, I don’t agree with you for a minute,” said
J.W. “I think it’s our duty to save .         . But Mr. Rob-
bins had disappeared through the office door leaving a
strong reek of whisky behind him. “I’d have given him
a piece of my mind,” said Eleanor, “if I hadn’t seen that
he was in no condition.”
    Driving out to Great Neck in the Pierce Arrow it was
thrilling. A long red afterglow lingered in the sky. Cross-
ing the Queensboro Bndge with the cold wind back of
them was like flying above lights and blocks of houses
and the purple bulk of Blackwell’s Island and the steam-
boats and the tall chimneys and the blue light of power-
plants. They talked of Edith Cavell and airraids and flags

                                                                              359

377
And searchlights and the rumble of armies advancing and
Joan of Arc. Eleanor drew the fur robe up to her chin
and thought about what she^d say to Gertrude Moore-
house.
    When they got to the house she felt a little afraid of
a scene. She stopped in the hall to do up her face with a
pocketmirror she had in her bag.
    Gertrude Moorehouse was sitting in a long chair be-
side a crackling fire. Eleanor glanced around the room
and was pleased at how lovely it looked. Gertrude Moore-
house went very pale when she saw her. wanted to talk
to you/’ said Eleanor. Gertrude Moorehouse held out her
hand without getting up. ^^Excuse me for not getting up,
Miss Stoddard/’ she said, “but Fm absolutely prostrated
by the terrible news.”
    “Civilization demands a sacrifice . . . from all of us,”
said Eleanor.
    “Of course it is terrible what the Huns have done,
cutting the hands off Belgian children and all that,” said
Gertrude Moorehouse.
    “Mrs. Moorehouse,” said Eleanor. “I want to speak to
you about this unfortunate misunderstanding of my rela-
tions with your husband .   .  . Do you think I am the sort
of woman who could come out here and face you if there
was anything In these horrible rumors? Our relations are
pure as driven snow.”
    “Please don’t speak of it, Miss Stoddard. I believe
you.”
    When J.W. came In they were sitting on either side of
the fire talking about Gertrude^s operation. Eleanor got
to her feet. “Oh, I think it’s wonderful of you, J.W.”
    J.W, cleared his throat and looked from one to the
 Kher.
    “It’s little less than my duty,” he said.
    “What is^ it?” asked Gertrude.
    “I have offered my services to the government to serve
         360

378
in whatever capacity they see fit for the duration of the
war.” “Not at the front,” ‘said Gertrude with a startled
look.
   “Pm leaving for Washington tomorrow ... Of course
I shall serve without pay.”
   “Ward, that^s noble of you,” said Gertrude. He walked
over slowly until he stood beside her chair, then he leaned
over and kissed her on the forehead. “We must all make
our sacrifices . . . My dear, I shall trust you and your
mother . .
   “Of course, Ward, of course . . . Ids all been a silly
misunderstanding.” Gertrude flushed red. She got to her
feet. “Pve been a damn suspicious fool . . . but you
mustn’t go to the front. Ward. Pll talk mother around”

.  .  . She went up to him and put her hands on his shoul-
ders. Eleanor stood back against the wall looking at them.
He wore a smoothfitting tuxedo. Gertrude’s salmon-
colored teagown stood out against the black. His light
hair was ashgray in the light from the crystal chandelier
against the tall ivorygray walls of the room. His face was
in shadow and looked very sad. Eleanor thought how little
people understood a man like that, how beautiful the
room was, like a play, like a Whistler, like Sarah Berm
hardt. Emotion misted her eyes.

    “I’ll join the Red Cross,” she said. “I can’t wait to get
to France.”


                                                 NEWSREEL XIX


                                U. S. AT WAR
              UPHOLD NATION CITY’S CRY
                       Over there
                               Over there

                                                                              361

379
        at the annual meeting of the stockholders of the Colt
Patent Firearms Manufacturing Company a $2,500,000
melon was cut. The present capital stock was increased. The
profits for the year were 259 per cent

                           JOYFUL SURPRISE OF BRITISH

                          The Yanks are coming
                                            We^re coming o-^o-o-ver

      PLAN LEGISLATION TO KEEP COLORED PEOPLE FROM
                                         WHITE AREAS

         many millions paid for golf about Chicago Hindu agi-
tators in nationwide scare Armour Urges U. S. Save Earth
From Famine

                         ABUSING FLAG TO BE PUNISHED

         Labor deputies peril to Russia acts have earmarks of dis^
honorable peace London hears

                         BILLIONS FOR ALLIES

                          And we won^t come home
                                   Till il^s over over there.



                                 THE CAMERA EYE (27)


          there were priests and nuns on the Esfagne                    the

  "^^tlantic was glassgreen and stormy                     covers were

 damped on the portholes and all the decklights were

 screened and you couldn^t light a match on deck

          but the stewards were very brave and said the Boche

 wouldn’t sink a boat of the Compagnie Generale anyway,

           362

380
because o£ the priests and nuns and the Jesuits and the

Comite des Forges promising not to bombard the Bassin

de la Brieye where the big smelters were and stock in the

company being owned by the Prince de Bourbon and the

Jesuits and the priests and nuns

       anyhow everybody was very brave except for Colonel

and Mrs. Knowlton of the American Red Cross who

had waterproof coldproof submarmeproof suits like

eskimosuits and they wore them and they sat up on deck

with the suits all blown up and only their faces showing

and there were firstaid kits in the pockets and in the belt

there was a waterproof container with milkchocolate and

crackers and maltedmilk tablets

        and in the morning you’d walk round the deck and

there would be Mr. Knowlton blowing up Mrs. Knowlton

        or Mrs. Knowlton blowing up Mr. Knowlton

        the Roosevelt boys were very brave in stiff visored

new American army caps and sharpshooter medals on the

khaki whipcord and they talked all day about We must

come in We must come in

        as if the war were a swimming pool

        and the barman was brave and the stewards were

brave they’d all been wounded and they were very glad

that they were stewards and not in the trenches

        and the pastry was magnificent

        at last it was the zone and a zigzag course we sat

                                                                               363

381
quiet in the bar and then it was the mouth of the Gironde

and a French torpedoboat circling round the ship in the

early pearl soft morning and the steamers following the

little patrolboat on account of the minefields            the sun

was rising red over the ruddy winegrowing land and the

Gironde was full of freighters and airplanes in the sun

and battleships

        the Garonne was red         it was autumn there were

barrels of new wine and shellcases along the quays in front

of the grayfaced houses and the masts of stocky sailboats

packed in against the great red iron bridge

        at the Hotel of the Seven Sisters everybody was in

mourning but business was brisk on account of the war and

every minute they expected the government to come down

from Paris

        up north they were dying in the mud and the trenches

but business was good in Bordeaux and the winegrowers

and the shipping agents and the munitionsmakers crowded

into the Chapon Fin and ate ortolans and mushrooms and

trufiBes and there was a big sign

                                 MEFIEZ-VOUS

                    les oreilles enemies vous eooutent

        red wine twilight and yellowgravelled squares edged

with winebarrels and a smell of chocolate in the park

gray statues and the names of streets

         3^4

382
        Street of Lost Hopes, Street of the Spirit of the

Laws, Street of Forgotten Footsteps

        and the smell of burning leaves and the grayfaced

Bourbon houses crumbling into red wine twilight

        at the Hotel of the Seven Sisters after you were in

bed late at night you suddenly woke up and there was a

secretserviceagent going through your bag

        and he frowned over your passport and peeped in

your books and said Monsieur c’est la petite vislte




                                                   FIGHTING BOB


        La Follette was born in the town limits of Prim-
rose; he worked on a farm in Dane County, Wis-
consin, until he was nineteen.
        At the university of Wisconsin he worked his way
through. He wanted to be an actor, studied elocution
and Robert Ingersoll and Shakespeare and Burke;
        (who will ever explain the influence of Shake-
speare in the last century, Marc Antony over Caesar’s
bier, Othello to the Venetian Senate and Polonius,
everywhere Polonius?)
        riding home in a buggy after commencement he
was Booth and Wilkes writing the Junius papers and
Daniel Webster and Ingersoll defying God and the
togaed great grave and incorruptible as statues mag-
nificently spouting through the capitoline centuries;



      ' he was the star debater in his class^

                                                                              365

383
         and won an interstate debate with an oration on
the character of lago.
         He went to work in a law office and ran for dis-

trict attorney. His schoolfriends canvassed the county
riding round evenings. He bucked the machine and
won the election.
         It was the revolt of the young man against the

state republican machine
         and Boss Keyes the postmaster in Madison who
ran the county was so surprised he about fell out of his

chair.



        That gave La Follette a salary to marry on. He
was twentyfive years old.
        Four years later he ran for congress} the univer-
sity was with him again} he was the youngsters’ candi-
date. When he was elected he was the youngest rep-
resentative in the house
        He was introduced round Washington by Philetus
Sawyer the Wisconsin lumber king who was used to
stacking and selling politicians the way he stacked and
told cordwood.
        He was a Republican and he’d bucked the ma-
chine. Now they thought they had him. No man
could stay honest in Washington.
        Booth played Shakespeare in Baltimore that win-
ter. Booth never would go to Washington on account
of the bitter memory of his brother. Bob La Follette
and his wife went to every performance.



        In the parlor of the Plankinton Hotel in Mil-
waukee during the state fair, Boss Sawyer the lumber
king tried to bribe him to influence his brother-in-law
         166

384
vvilo was presiding judge over the prosecution, of the
Republican state treasurer 3
        Bob La Follette walked out of the hotel in a white
rage. From that time it was war without quarter with
the Republican machine in Wisconsin until he was
elected governor and wrecked the Republican machine;
        this was the tenyears war that left Wisconsin the
model state where the voters, orderloving Germans
and Finns, Scandinavians fond of their own opinion,,
learned to use the new leverage, direct primaries, ref-
erendum and recall.



        La Follette taxed the railroads



        John C. Payne said to a group of politicians in the
lobby of the Ebbitt House in Washington “La Fol-
lette’s a damn fool if he thinks he can buck a railroad
with five thousand miles of continuous track, he’ll find
he’s mistaken   .   .  . We’ll take care of him when the
time comes.”
         But when the time came the farmers of Wisconsin
and the young lawyers and doctors and businessmen
just out of school
                 took care of him
                 and elected him governor three times
                 and then to the United States Senate,



                 where he worked all his life making long
speeches full of statistics, struggling to save democratic
government, to make a farmers’ and small business-
men’s commonwealth, lonely with his back to the wall,
fighting corruption and big business and high finance

                                                                                367

385
jnd trusts and combinations of combinations and the
miasmic lethargy of Washington.


         He was one of “the little group of wilful men
expressing no opinion but their own”
        who stood out against Woodrow Wilson’s armed
                                                                                      they
ship bill that made war with Germany certain j
called it a filibuster but it was six men with nerve
straining to hold back a crazy steamroller with their
bare hands j
        the press pumped hatred into its readers against
La Follette,
        the traitor,
        they burned him in effigy in Illinois j
        in Wheeling they refused to let him speak.



        In nineteen twentyfour La Follette ran for presi-
dent and without money or political machine rolled up
four and a half million votes
        but he was a sick man, incessant work and the
breathed out air of committee rooms and legislative
chambers choked him
        and the dirty smell of politicians,
        and he died,
        an orator haranguing from the capitol of a lost
republic}
        but we will remember
        how he sat firm in March nineteen seventeen
while Woodrow Wilson was being inaugurated for the
second time, and for three days held the vast machine
at deadlock. They wouldn’t let him speak} the gal-
leries glared hatred at him} the senate was a lynching
party,
        a stumpy man with a lined face, one leg stuck out

386
in the aisle and his arms folded and a chewed cigar

in the corner of his mouth
        and an undelivered speech on his desk,
        a wilful man expressing no opinion but his own.



                                CHARLEY ANDERSON


    Charley Anderson’s mother kept a railroad boarding-
house near the Northern Pacific station at Fargo, N. D.

It was a gabled frame house with porches all round,
painted mustard yellow with chocolatebrown trim and
out back there was always washing hanging out on
sagging lines that ran from a pole near the kitchen door

to a row of brokendown chickenhouses. Mrs. Anderson
was a quietspoken grayhaired woman with glasses, the

boarders were afraid of her and did their complaining
about the beds, or the food, or that the eggs weren’t fresh

to waddling bigarmed Lizzie Green from the north of

Ireland who was the help and cooked and did all the
housework. When any of the boys came home drunk it

was Lizzie with a threadbare man’s overcoat pulled over

her nightgown who came out to make them shut up. One

of the brakemen tried to get fresh with Lizzie one night

and got such a sock in the jaw that he fell clear off the

front porch. It was Lizzie who washed and scrubbed

Charley when he was little, who made him get to school

on time and put arnica on his knees when he skinned them
and soft soap on his chilblains and mended the rents in

 his clothes. Mrs. Anderson had already raised three chil-

 dren who had grown up and left home before Charley

 came, so that she couldn’t seem to keep her mind on

 Charley. Mr. Anderson had also left home about the time

 Charley was bornj he’d^ad to go West on account of his

                                                                                3^9

387
weak lungs, couldn^t stand the hard winters, was how Mrs.
Anderson put it. Mrs. Anderson kept the accounts, pre-
served or canned strawberries, peas, peaches, beans, to-
matoes, pears, plums, applesauce as each season came
round, made Charley read a chapter of the Bible every
day and did a lot of churchwork.
    Charley was a chunky little boy with untidy towhair
and gray eyes. He was a pet with the boarders and liked
things allright except Sundays when he^d have to go to
 -hurch twice and to sundayschool and then right after
dinner his mother would read him her favorite sections of
Matthew or Esther or Ruth and ask him questions about
fhe chapters he^d been assigned for the week. This lesson
took place at a table with a red tablecloth next to a window
that Mrs. Anderson kept banked with pots of patience-
plant, wandering jew, begonias and ferns summer and
winter. Charley would have pins and needles in his legs
and the big dinner he^d eaten would have made him
drowsy and he was terribly afraid of committing the sin
against the holy ghost which his mother hinted was in-
attention in church or in sundayschool or when she was
reading him the Bible. Winters the kitchen was absolutely
quiet except for the faint roaring of the stove or Lizzie^s
heavy step or puffing breath as she stacked the dinner-
dishes she’d just washed back in the cupboard. Summers
it was much worse. The other kids would have told him
about going swimming down in the Red River or fishing
or playing follow my leader in the lumberyard or on the
coalbunkers back of the roundhouse and the caught flies
would buzz thinly in the festooned tapes of flypaper and
he’d hear the yardengine shunting freightcars or the
through train for Winnipeg whistling for the station and
the bell clanging, and he’d feel sticky and itchy in his
stiff collar and he’d keep looking up at the loudticking
^3orcelain clock on the wall. It made the time go too slowly
to look up at the clock often, so^ he wouldn’t let himself
         370

388
look until he thought fifteen minutes had gone by, bm
when he looked again it’d only be five minutes and he’d
feel desperate. Maybe it’d be better to commit the sin
against the holy ghost right there and be damned good
and Droper once and for all and run away with a tramp
the way Dolphy Olsen did, but he didn’t have the nerve.
    By the time he was ready for highschool he began to
find funny things in the Bible, things like the kids talked
about when they got tired playing toad in the hole in
the deep weeds back of the lumberyard fence, the part
about Onan and the Levite and his concubine and the
Song of Solomon, it made him feel funny and made his
heart pound when he read it, like listening to scraps of
talk among the railroad men in the boardinghouse, and
he knew what hookers were and what was happening when
women got so fat in front and it worried him and he was
careful when he talked to his mother not to let her know
he knew about things like that.
    Charley’s brother Jim had married the daughter of ^
liverystable owner in Minneapolis. The spring Charley
was getting ready to graduate from the eighth grade they
came to visit Mrs. Anderson Jim smoked cigars right in
the house and jollied his mother and while he was thert
there was no talk of biblereading. Jim took Charley fish-
ing one Sunday up the Sheyenne and told him that if
he came down to the Twin Cities when school was over
he’d give him a job helping round the garage he was
starting up in part of his fatherinlaw’s liverystable. It
sounded good when he told the other guys in school that
he had a job in the city for the summer. He was glad to
get out as his sister Esther had just come back from taking
a course in nursing and nagged him all the time about
talking slang and not keeping his clothes neat and eating
too much pie.
    He felt fine the morning he went over to Moorhead
all alone, carrying a suitcase Esther had lent him, to take

                                                                               37 ^

389
the train for the Twin Cities. At the station he tried to
buy a package of cigarettes but the man at the newsstand
kidded him and said he was too young. When he started

it was a fine spring day a litde too hot. There was sweat
on the flanks of the big horses pulling the long line of
flourwagons that was crossing the bridge. While he was
waiting in the station the air became stifling and a steamy
mist came up. The sunlight shone red on the broad backs
of the grain elevators along the track. He heard one man
say to another, ^'^Looks to me like it might be a tornado,”
and when he got on the tram he half leaned out of the
open window watching purple thunderheads building up
in the northwest beyond the bilghtgreen wheat that
stretched clear to the clouds. He kinda hoped it would be
a tornado because he’d never seen one, but when the
lightning began cracking like a whip out of the clouds he
felt a little scared, though being on the train with the
conductor and the other passengers made it seem safer.
It wasn’t a tornado but it was a heavy thundershower and
the wheatfields turned to zinc as great trampling hissing
sheetsi of rain advanced slowly across them. Afterwards
the sun came out and Charley opened the window and
everything smelt like spring and there were birds singing
in all the birchwoods and in the dark firs round all the
little shining lakes.
    Jim was there to meet him at the Union Depot in a
Ford truck. They stopped at the freight station and
Charley had to help lo^ a lot of heavy packages of spare
parts shipped from Detroit and marked ^^Vogel’s Garage.”
Charley tried to look as if he’d lived in a big city all his
life, but the clanging trolleycars and the roughshod hoofs
of truckhorses striking sparks out of the cobbles and the
goodlooking blond girls and the stores and the big Ger-
man beersaloons and the hum that came from mills and
machineshops went to his head. Jim looked tall and thin
in his overalls and had a new curt way of talking, ^^Kid,
         372

390
you see you mind yourself a little up to the house; th'^
old man’s an old German, Hedwig’s old man, an’ a little
pernickety, like all old Germans are,” said Jim when
they’d filled the truck and were moving slowly through
the heavy traffic, “Sure, Jim,” said Charley and he began
to feel a little uneasy about what it ’ud be like living i»
Minneapolis. He wished Jim ’ud smile a little more.
    Old man Vogel was a stocky redfaced man with un-
tidy gray hair and a potbelly, fond of dumpling and stews!
with plenty of rich sauce on them and beer, and Jim’i
wife Hedwig was his only daughter. His wife was dead
but he had a middleaged German woman everybody ad
dressed as Aunt Hartmann to keep house for him. She
followed the men around all the time with a mop and
between her and Hedwig, whose blue eyes had a peevish
look because she was going to have a baby in the fall, the
house was so spotless that you could have eaten a fried
egg off the linoleum anywhere. They never let the win-
dows be opened for fear of the dust coming in. The house
was right on the street and the livery stable was in the
yard behind, entered through an alley beyond which was
the old saddler’s shop that had just been done over as a
garage. When Jim and Charley drove up the signpainters
were on a stepladder out front putting up the new shiny
red and white sign that read ‘Vogel’s garage,” “The old
bastard,” muttered Jim, “He said he’d call it Vogel and
Anderson’s, but what the hell!” Everything smelt of
stables and a colored man was leading a skinny horse
around with a blanket over him.
    Ail that summer Charley washed cars and drained
transmissions and relined brakes. He was always dirty
and greasy in greasy overalls, in the garage by seven
every morning and not through till late in the evening
when he was too tired to do anything but drop into the

cot that had been fixed for him in the attic over the garage.
Jim gave him a dollar a week for pocket money and ex-

                                                                               373

391
plained that he was mighty generous to do it as it was to
Charley^s advantage to learn the business. Saturday nights
he was the last one to get a bath and there usually wasn^t
anything but lukewarm water left so that he’d have a
hard time getting cleaned up. Old man Vogel was a

socialist and no churchgoer and spent all day Sunday drink-
ing beer with his cronies. At Sunday dinner everybody
talked German, and Jim and Charley sat at the table
glumly without saying anything, but old Vogel plied them
with beer and made jokes at which Hedwig and Aunt
Hartmann always laughed uproariously, and after dinner
Charley’s head would be swimming from the beer that
tasted awful bitter to him, but he felt he had to drink it,
and old man Vogel would tease him to smoke a cigar and
then tell him to go out and see the town. He’d walk out
feeling overfed and a little dizzy and take the streetcar
io St. Paul to see the new state capitol or to Lake Har-
riet or go out to Big Island Park and ride on the roller-
coaster or walk around the Parkway until his feet felt like
they’d drop off. He didn’t know any kids his own age at

first, so he took to reading for company. He’d buy every
number of Pofular Mechanics and The ScienHjic Amen--
can and Adventure and The Wide World Magazine.
He had it all planned to start building a yawlboat from
the plans in The ScienUfic American and to take a trip
down to the Mississippi River to the Gulf. He’d live
by shooting ducks and fishing for catfish. He started sav-
ing up his dollars to buy himself a shotgun.
    He liked it all right at old man Vogel’s, though, on
account of not having to read the Bible or go to church,
and he liked tinkering with motors and learned to drive
the Ford truck. After a while he got to know Buck and
Slim Jones, two brothers about his age who lived down
the block. He was a pretty big guy to them on account of
working in a garage. Buck sold newspapers and had a
system of getting into movingpicture shows by the exit

         374

392
doors and knew all the best fences to see ballgames from.
Once Charley got to know the Jones boys he’d run round
to their place as soon as he was through dinner Sundays
and they’d have a whale of a time getting hitches all over
the place on graintrucks, riding on the back bumpers of
streetcars and getting chased by cops and going out on
the lumber booms and going swimming and climbing
round above the falls and he’d get back all sweaty and
with his good suit dirty and be bawled out by Hedwig
for being late for supper. Whenever old Vogel found the
Jones boys hanging round the garage he’d chase them out,
but when he and Jim were away, Gus the colored stable-
man would come over smelling of horses and tell them
stones about horseraces and fast women and whiskydrink-
ing down at Louisville and the proper way to take a girl
the first time and how he and his steady girl just did it ail
night without stopping not even for a minute.
    Labor Day old man Vogel took Jim and his daughtet
and Aunt Hartmann out driving in the surrey behind
fine pair of bays that had been left with him to sell and
Charley was left to take care of the garage in case some-
body came along who wanted gas or oil. Buck and Slim
came round and they all talked about how it was Labor
Day and wasn’t it hell to pay that they weren’t going out
anywhere. There was a doubleheader out at the Fair
Grounds and lots of other ballgames around. The trouble
started by Charley showing Buck how to drive the truck,
then to show him better he had to crank her up, then
before he knew it he was telling them he’d take them for
a ride round the block. After they’d ridden round the
block he went back and closed up the garage and they
went joyriding out towards Minnehaha. Charley said to
himself he’d drive very carefully and be home hours
before the folks got back, but somehow he found himself
speeding down an asphalt boulevard and almost ran into
a ponycart full of little girls that turned in suddenly

                                                                              375

393
from a side road. Then on the way home they were drink-
ing sarsaparilla out of the bottles and having a fine time
when Buck suddenly said there was a cop on a motorcycle
following them. Charley speeded up to get away from the

cop, made a turn too sharp and stopped with a crash
against a telegraph pole. Buck and Slim beat it as fast as
they could run and there was Charley left to face the cop.
    The cop was a Swede and cursed and swore and bawled
him out and said he^d take him to the hoosegow for driv-
ing without a license, but Charley found his brother Jim’s
license under the seat and said his brother had told him
to take the car back to the garage after they’d delivered
a load of apples out at Minnehaha and the cop let him

ofl: and said to drive more carefully another time. The
car ran all right except one fender vas crumpled up and
the steering wheel was a little funny. Charley drove home
so slow that the radiator was boiling over when he got
back and there was the surrey standing in front of the
house and Gus holding the bays by the head and all the
family just getting out.
   There was nothing he could say. The first thing they
saw was the crumpled fender. They all lit into him and
Aunt Hartmann yelled the loudest and old Vogel was
purple in the face and they all talked German at him and
Hedwig yanked at his coat and slapped his face and they
all said Jim ’d have to give him a licking. Charley got
sore and said nobody was going to give him a licking and
then Jim said he reckoned he’d better go back to Fargo
anyway, and Charley went up and packed his suitcase and
went off without saying goodby to any of them that eve-
ning with his suitcase in one hand and five back numbers
of The Argosy under his arm. He had just enough jack
saved up to get a ticket to Barnesville. After that he had
to play hide and seek with the conductor until he dropped
off the train at Moorhead. His mother was glad to see
him and said he was a good boy to get back in time to

         376

394
visit with her a little before highschool opened and talked
about his being confirmed. Charley didn’t say anything
about the Ford truck and decided in his mind he wouldn’t
be confirmed in any damned church. He ate a big break-
fast that Lizzie fixed for him and went into his room and
lay down on the bed. He wondered if not wanting to be
confirmed was the sin against the holy ghost but the
thought didn’t scare him as much as it used to. He was
sleepy from sitting up on the train all night and fell
asleep right away.
    Charley dragged through a couple of years of high-
school, making a little money helping round the Moor-
head Garage evenings, but he didn’t like it home an)
more after he got back from his trip to the Twin Cities
His mother wouldn’t let him work Sundays and nagged
him about being confirmed and his sister Esther nagged
him about everything and Lizzie treated him as if he
was still a little kid, called him “Pet” before the boarders
and he was sick of schooling, so the spring when he was
seventeen, after commencement, he went down to Min-
neapolis again looking for a job on his own this time. As
he had money to keep him for a few days the first thing
he did was to go down to Big Island Park. He wanted
to ride on the rollercoasters and shoot in the shooting-
galleries and go swimming and pick up girls. He was
through with hick towns like Fargo and Moorhead where
nothing ever happened.
    It was almost dark when he got to the lake. As the

little steamboat drew up to the wharf he could hear the
jazzband through the trees, and the rasp and rattle of
the rollercoaster and yells as a car took a dip. There were
a dancing pavilion and colored lights among the trees
and a smell of girls’ perfumery and popcorn and molasses
candy and powder from the shooting gallery and the
barkers were at it in front of their booths. As it was
 Monday evening there weren’t very many people. Charley

                                                                                377

395
  ent round the rollercoaster a couple of times and got to

talking with the young guy who ran it about what the
chances were of getting a job round there.
   The guy said to stick around, Svenson the manager
Would be there when they closed up at eleven, and he
thought he might be looking for a guy. The guy^s name
                              he said it wasn’t much of a graft but
was Ed Walters 5
that Svenson was pretty straight, he let Charley take a
couple of free rides to see how the rollercoaster worked
and handed him out a bottle of cream soda and told him
to keep his shirt on. This was his second year in the amuse-
ment game and he had a sharp foxface and a wise man-
ner.
    Charley’s heart was thumping when a big hollowfaced
man with coarse sandy hair came round to collect the
receipts at the ticket booth. That was Svenson. He looked
Charley up and down and said he’d try him out for a
week and to remember that this was a quiet family amuse-
ment park and that he wouldn’t stand for any rough stuff
and told him to come round at ten the next morning.
Charley said ^^So long” to Ed Walters and caught the
last boat and car back to town. When he got out of the
car it was too late to take his bag out of the station parcel-
roomj he didn’t want to spend money on a room or to
go out to Jim’s place so he slept on a bench 'in front of
the City Hall. It was a warm night and it made him feel
good to be sleeping on a bench like a regular hobo. The
arclights kept getting in his eyes, though, and he was
nervous about the cop, it’d be a hell of a note to get
pinched for a vag and lose the job out at the park. His
teeth were chattering when he woke, up in the gray early
morning. The arclights spluttered pink against a pale
lemonyellow skyj the big business blocks with all their
empty windows looked funny and gray and deserted. He
had to walk fast pounding the pavement with his heels
to get the blood going through his veins again.

         378

396
    He found a stand where he could get a cup of coffee
and a doughnut for five cents and went out to Lake Min-
netonka on the first car. It was a bright summer day with
a little north in the wind. The lake was very blue and the
birchtrunks looked very white and the little leaves danced
in the wind greenyellow against the dark evergreens and
the dark blue of the sky. Charley thought it was the most
beautiful place he’d ever seen. He waited a long tim^
drowsing in the sun on the end of the wharf for the boat
to start over to the island. When he got there the park
was all locked up, there were shutters on all the booths
and the motionless red and blue cars of the rollercoaster
looked forlorn in the morning light. Charley roamed
round for a while but his eyes smarted and his legs ached
and his suitcase was too heavy^ so he found a place
sheltered by the wall of a shack from the wind and lay
down in the warm sun on the pineneedles and went to
sleep with his suitcase beside him.
   He woke up with a start. His Ingersoll said eleven. He
had a cold sinking feeling. It’d be lousy to lose the job
by being late. Svenson was there sitting in the tickef
booth at the rollercoaster with a straw hat on the back
of his head. He didn’t say anything about the time. He
just told Charley to take his coat off and help MacDonald
the engineer oil up the motor.
    Charley w’^orked on that rollercoaster all summer until
the park closed in September. He lived in a little camp
over at Excelsior with Ed Walters and a wop named
Spagnolo who had a candy concession.
    In the next camp Svenson lived with his six daughters.
His wife was dead. Anna the eldest was about thirty and
was cashier at the amusement park, two of them were
waitresses at the Tonka Bay Hotel and the others were
in highschool and didn’t work. They were all tall and
blond and had nice complexions. Charley fell for the
youngest, Emiscah, who was just about his age. They had

                                                                               379

397
a float and a springboard and they al] went in swimming

together. Charley wore a bathingsuit upper and a pair of

khaki pants all summer and got very sunburned. Ed’s

girl was Zona and all four of them used to go out canoe-

ing after the amusement park closed, particularly warm
nights when there was a moon. They didn’t drink but
they smoked cigarettes and played the phonograph and

kissed and cuddled up together in the bottom of the canoe.
When they’d got back to the boys’ camp, Spagnolo would
be m bed and they’d haze him a little and put junebugs
under his blankets and he’d curse and swear and toss
around. Emiscah was a great hand for making fudge, and
Charley was crazy about her and she seemed to like him.
She taught him how to frenchkiss and would stroke his
hair and rub herself up against him like a cat but she
never let him go too far and he wouldn’t have thought it
was right anyway. One night all four of them went out
and built a fire under a pine in a patch of big woods up the
hill back of the camps. They toasted marshmallows and
sat round the fire telling ghoststories. They had blankets
and Ed knew how to make a bed with hemlock twigs
stuck in the ground and they all four of them slept in the
same blankets and tickled each other and roughhoused
around and it took them a long time to get to sleep. Part
of the time Charley lay between the two girls and they
cuddled up close to him, but he got a hard on and couldn’t
sleep and was worried for fear the girls would notice.
    He learned to dance and to play poker and when labor-
day came he hadn’t saved any money but he felt he’d
had a wonderful summer.
    He and Ed got a room together in St. Paul. He got
a job as machinist’s assistant in the Northern Pacific shops
and made fair money. He learned to run an electric lathe
and started a course in nightschool to prepare for civil
engineering at the Mechanical Arts High. Ed didn’t seem
to have much luck about jobs, all he seemed to be able
         380

398
to do v/as pick up a few dollars now and then as attendant
at a bowling alley. Sundays they often ate dinner with the
Svensons. Mr. Svenson was running a small movie house
called the Leif Ericsson on Fourth Street but things
weren’t going so well. He took it for granted that the
boys were engaged to two of his daughters and was only
too glad to see them come around. Charley took Emiscah
out every Saturday night and spent a lot on candy and
taking her to vaudeville shows and to a Chink restaurant
where you could dance afterwards. At Christmas he gave
her his seal ring and after that she admitted that she was
engaged to him. They’d go back to the Svensons’ and sic
on the sofa in the parlor hugging and kissing.
    She seemed to enjoy getting him all wrought up, thai
she’d run off and go and fix her hair or put some rouge
on her face and be gone a long time and he’d hear her
upstairs giggling with her sisters. He’d walk up and down
in the parlor, where there was only one light in a flowered
shade, feeling nervous and jumpy. He didn’t know what
to do. He didn’t want to get married because that ’ud
keep him from traveling round the country and getting
ahead in studying engineering. The other guys at the shop
who weren’t married went down the line or picked up
streetwalkers, but Charley was afraid of getting a disease
and he never seemed to have any time what with nightr
school and all, and besides it was Emiscah he wanted.
    After he’d given her a last rough kiss, feeling hei
tongue in his mouth and his nostrils full of her hair and
the taste of her mouth in his mouth he’d walk home with

his ears ringing, feeling sick and. weak; when he got tv
bed he couldn’t sleep but would toss around all night
thinking he was going mad and Ed’d grunt at him from
the other side of the bed for aissake to keep still.

    In February Charley got a bad sore throat and the

doctor he went to said it was diphtheria and sent him to

 the hospital. He was terribly sick for several days afteif

                                                                                SSi

399
they gave him the antitoxin. When he was getting better
Ed and Emiscah came to see him and sat on the edge of

his bed and made him feel good. Ed was all dressed up
and said he had a new job and was making big money but
he wouldn’t tell what it was. Charley got the idea that
Ed and Emiscah were going round together a little since

he’d been sick but he didn’t think anything of it.
    The man in the next cot, who was also recovering from
diphtheria, was a lean grayhaired man named Michaelson.
He’d been working in a hardware store that winter and
was having a hard time. Up to a couple of years before
he’d had a farm in Iowa in the cornbelt, but a series of
bad crops had ruined him, the bank had foreclosed and
taken the farm and offered to let him work it as a tenant
but he’d said he’d be damned if he’d work as a tenant
for any man and had pulled up his stakes and come to
the city, and here he was fifty years old with a wife and
three small children to support trying to start from the
ground up again. He was a great admirer of Bob La
Follette and had a theory that the Wall Street bankers
were conspiring to seize the government and run the
country by pauperizing the farmer. He talked all day in
a thin wheezy voice until the nurse made him shut up,
about the Non-Partisan League and the Farmer-Labor
party and the destiny of the great northwest and the
need for workingmen and farmers to stick together to
elect honest men like Bob La Follette. Charley had joined
a local of an A. F. of L. union that fall and Michaelson’s
talk, broken by spells of wheezing and coughing, made
him feel excited and curious about politics. He decided
he’d read the papers more and keep up with what was
going on in the world. What with this war and every-
thing you couldn’t tell what might happen.
    When Michaelson’s wife and children came to see him
 he introduced them to Charley and said that being laid up
 next to a bright young fellow like that made being sick
         382

400
a pleasi^e. It made Charley feel bad to see how miserably
pale and illfed they looked and what poor clothes they had
on in this zero weather. He left the hospital before
Michaelson did and the last thing Michaelson said when
Charley leaned over him to shake his dry bony hand was
“Boy, you read Henry George, do you hear . . . ? He
knows what s the trouble with this country; damme if
he don’t.”
   Charley wa^ so glad to be walking on his pins down the
snowy street in the dryicecold wind and to get the smell
of iodoform and sick people out of his head that he forgot
all about it.
   First thing he did was to go to Svenson’s. Emiscah
asked him where Ed Walters was. He said he hadn’t been
home and didn’t know. She looked worried when he said
that and he wondered about it. “Don’t Zona know?” asked
Charley. “No, Zona’s got a new feller; that’s aU she think.-!
about.” Then she snailed and patted his hand and babied
him a little bit and they sat on the sofa and she brought
out some fudge she’d made and they held hands and
gave each other sticky kisses and Charley felt happy.
When Anna came in she said how thin he looked and
that they’d have to feed him up, and he stayed to supper.
Mr. Svenson said to come and eat supper with them every
night for a while until he was on his feet again. After
supper they all played hearts in the front parlor and had
a fine time.
    When Charley got back to his lodging house he met
the landlady in the hall. She said his friend had left with-
out paying the rent and that he’d pay up right here and
now or else she wouldn’t let him go up to his room. He
argued with her and said he’d just come out of the hos-
pital and she finally said she’d let him stay another week.
She was a big softlooking woman with puckered cheeks
and a yellow chintz apron full of little pockets. When
Charley got up to the hall bedroom where he’d slept all

401
mnter with Ed, it was miserably cold and lonely. He
got into the bed between the icy sheets and lay shivering,

feeling weak and kiddish and almost ready to cry, won-
dering why the hell Ed had gone off without leaving him
word and why Emiscah had looked so funny when he

said he didn^t know where Ed was.
    Next day he went to the shop and got his old job back,
though he was so weak he wasn’t much good. The fore-
man was pretty decent about it and told him to go easy

for a few days, but he wouldn’t pay him for the time he
was sick because he wasn’t an old employee and hadn’t
gotten a certificate from the company doctor. That eve-
ning he went to the bowiingalley where Ed used to work.
The barkeep upstairs said Ed had beaten it to Chi on
account of some flimflam about raffling off a watch. ^^Good
riddance, if you ask me,” he said. ^^That bozo has all the
makin’s of a bad egg.”
    He had a letter from Jim saying that ma had written
from Fargo that she was worried about him and that
Charley had better let Jim take a look at him so he went
over to the Vogels’ next Sunday. First thing he did when
he saw Jim was to say that busting up the Ford had been
a damn fool kid’s trick and they shook hands on it and
Jim said nobody would say anything about it and that
he’d better stay and eat with them. The meal was fine
and the beer was fine. Jim’s kid was dam cutej it was
funny to think that he was an uncle. Even Hedwig didn’t
seem so peevish as before. The garage was making good
money and old man Vogel was going to give up the livery-
stable and retire. When Charley said he was studying at
nightschool old Vogel began to pay more attention to
him. Somebody said something about La Foilette and
Charley said he was a big man.
    ‘Wat is the use being a big man if you are wrong?” said
oM Vogel with beersuds in his mustache. He tool: an^
 Dther draft out of his stein and looked at Charley with
         384

402
sparkling blue eyes. “But dot’s only a beginning     . .   . ve
vill make a sozialist out of you yet.” Charley blushed and
said, “Well, I don’t know about that,” and Aunt Hart-
mann piled another helping of hasenpfeffer and noodles
and mashed potatoes on his plate.
    One raw March evening he took Emiscah to see “The
Birth of a Nation.” The battles and the music and the
bugles made them all jelly inside. They both had tears in
their eyes when the two boys met on the battlefield and
died in each other’s arms on the battlefield. When the
Ku Klux Klan charged across the screen Charley had his
leg against Emiscah’s leg and she dug her fingers into
his knee so hard it hurt. When they came out Charley
said by heck he thought he wanted to go up to Canada
and enlist and go over and see the Great War. Emiscah
said not to be silly and then looked at him kinda funnj
and asked him if he was pro-British. He said he didn’t
care and that the only fellows that would gain would be
the bankers, whoever won. She said, “Isn’t it terrible.?
Let’s not talk about it any more.”
    When they got back to the Svensons’, Mr. Svenson
was sitting in the parlor in his shirtsleeves reading the
paper. He got up and went to meet Charley with a wor-
ried frown on his face and was just about to say some-
thing when Emiscah shook her head. He shrugged hin
shoulders and went out. Charley asked Emiscah what
was eating the old man. She grabbed hold of him and put
her head on his shoulder and burst out crying. “What’s
                                  what’s the matter, kitten.?” he kept
the matter, kitten 5
asking. She just cried and cried until he could feel her
tears on his cheek and neck and said, “For crissake, snap
out of it, kitten} you’re wilting my collar.”
    She let herself drop on the sofa and he could see that
she was working hard to pull herself together. He sat
down beside her and kept patting her hand. Suddenly she
got up and stood in the middle of the floor. He tried to

                                                                               385

403
put his arms around her to pet her but she pushed him
off. “Charley,” she said in a hard strained voice, “lemme
tellye somethin’ ... I think I’m goin’ to have a baby.”
    “But you’re crazy. We haven’t ever .         . .”
    “Maybe it’s somebody else          . Oh, God, I’m going
to kill myself.”
    Charley took her by the arms and made her sit down
 ;>n the sofa. “Now pull yourself together, and tell me
what the trouble is.”
    “I wish you’d beat me up,” Emiscah said, laughing
                                 hit me with your fist.”
rrazily. “Go ahead 5
    Charley went weak all over.
    “Tell me what the trouble is,” he said. ‘fBy Jez, it
wouldn’t be Ed.”
    She looked up at him with scared eyes, her face drawn
like an old woman’s. “No, no .     .  . Here’s how it is. I’m
1 month past my time, see, and I don’t know enough about
things like that, so I asks Anna about it and she says I’m
goin’ to have a baby sure and that we’ve got to get married
right away and she told dad, the dirty little sneak, and I
couldn’t tell ’em it wasn’t you . . . They think it’s you,
see, and dad says it’s all right, young folks bein’ like that
nowadays an’ everythin’ an’ says we’ll have to get married
iind I thought I wouldn’t let on an’ you’d never know,
i)ut, kid, I had to tell you.”
    “Oh, Jez,” said Charley. He looked at the flowered
pink shade with a fringe over the lamp on the table be-
side him and the tablecover with a fringe and at his shoes
and the roses on the carpet. “Who was it?”
    “It was when you were in the hospital, Charley. We
had a lot of beer to dnnk an’ he took me to a hotel. I
guess I’m just bad, that’s all. He was throwin’ money
around an’ we went in a taxicab and I guess I was crazy.
No, I’m a bad woman through and through, Charley. I
went out with him every night when you were in the
hospital.”

         ^86

404
           God, it was Ed.’-’
    She nodded and then hid her face and started to cry
again.
    *^The lousy little bastard,” Charley kept saying. She
irumpled up on the sofa with her face in her hands.
    “He’s gone to Chicago . . . He’s a bad egg allright,”
said Charley.
    He felt he had to get out in the air. He picked up his
coat and hat and started to put them on. Then she got to
her feet and threw herself against him. She held him
close and her arms were tight round his neck. “Honestly,
Charley, I loved you all the time ... I pretended to
myself it was you.” She kissed him on the mouth. He
pushed her away, but he felt weak and tired and thought
of the icy streets walking home and his cold hallbedroom
and thought, what the hell did it matter anyway and
took off his hat and coat again. She kissed him and loved
him up and locked the parlor door and they loved each
other up on the sofa and she let him do everything he
wanted. Then after a while she turned on the light and
straightened her clothes and went over to the mirror to
fix her hair and he tied his necktie again and she smoothed
down his hair as best she could with her fingers and they
unlocked the parlor door very carefully and she went out
in the hall to call dad. Her face was flushed and she
looked very pretty again. Mr. Svenson and Anna and all
the girls were out in the kitchen and Emiscah said, “Dad,
Charley and I are going to get married next month,” and
everybody said, “Congratulations,” and all the girls kissed
Charley and Mr. Svenson broke out a bottle of whisky
and they had a drink all round and Charley went home
feeling like a whipped dog.
    There was a fellow named Hendriks at the shop seemed
a pretty wise guyj Charley asked him next noon whether
 he didn’t know of anything a girl could take and he said
 he had a perscription for some pills and next day he

                                                                                387

405
f^roxight it and told Charley not to tell the druggist what
he wanted them for. It was payday and Hendriks came
round to Charley^s room after he’d gotten cleaned up that
night and asked him if he’d gotten the pills allright.
Charley had the package right in his pocket and was going

to cut nightschool that night and take it to Emiscah. First
he and Hendriks went to have a drink at the corner.
He didn’t like whisky straight and Hendriks said to take

it with ginger ale. It tasted great and Charley felt sore
and miserable inside and didn’t want to see Emiscah any-
way. They had some more drinks and then went and
bowled for a while. Charley beat him four out of five and
Hendriks said the party was on him from now on.
    Hendriks was a squareshouldered redheaded guy with
a freckled face and a twisted nose and he began telling

stories about funny things that had happened with the
ribs and how that was his long suit anyway. He’d been
all over and had had high yallers and sealskin browns
down New Orleans and Chink girls in Seattle, Wash.,
and a fullblooded Indian squaw in Butte, Montana, and
French girls and German Jewish girls in Colon and a
Caribee woman more than ninety years old in Port of
Spam, He said that the Twin Cities was the bunk and
what a guy ought to do was to go down an’ get a job in
the oilfields at Tampico or in Oklahoma where you could
make decent money and live like a white man. Charley
said he’d pull out of St. Paul in a minute if it wasn’t that
he wanted to finish his course in nightschool and Hendriks
told him he was a damn fool, that book learnin’ never
got nobody nowhere and what he wanted was to have a
good time when he had his strength and after that to hell
wid ’em. Charley said he felt like saying to hell wid ’em
anyway.
    They went to several bars, and Charley who wasn’t used
to drinking anything much except beer began to reel
a little, but it was swell barging round with Hendriks
         3S8

406
from bar to bar. Hendriks sang My Mother Was a ILady
in one place and The Bastard King of England in another
where an old redfaced guy with a cigar set them up to
some drinks. Then they tried to get into a dancehall but
the guy at the (door said they were too drunk and threw
them out on their ear and that seemed funny as hell and
they went to a back room of a place Hendriks knew and
there were two girls there Hendriks knew and Hendriks
fixed it up for ten dollars each for all night, then they
had one more drink before going to the girls^ place and
Hendriks sang:

Two drummers sat at dinner in a grand hotel one day
While dining they were chatting in a jolly sort of way
And when a fretty waitress brought them a tray of food
They sfoke to her familiarly in a manner rather rude

    ^^He’s a hot sketch,” said one of the girls to the other.
But the other was a little soused and began to get a cry-
ing jag when Hendriks and Charley put their heads to-
gether and sang:

My mother was a lady like yours you will allow
And you may have a sister who needs protection now
Pve come to this great city to 'find a brother dear
And you wouldn^t dare insult mSy sir^ if Jack were only
    here.

    They cried and the other one kept shoving her and
saying, ^^Dry your eyes, deary, youTe maudlin,” and i(
was funny as hell.
    The next few weeks Charley was uneasy and miserable.
The pills made Emiscah feel awful sick but they finally
brought her around. Charley didn’t go there much,
though they still talked about ‘‘‘When we’re married,” and
the Svensons treated Charley as a soninkw. Emiscah
nagged a little about Charley’s drinking and running
round with this felldw HendAs, Charley had dropped

                                                                               389

407
t)ut of nightschool and was looking for a chance to get
K job that would take him away somewhere, he didn^t
much care where. Then one day he busted a lathe and the
foreman fired him. When he told Emiscah about it she
got sore and said she thought it was about time he gave
up boozing and running round and he paid little atten-
tion to her and he said it was about time for him to butt
out, and picked up his hat and coat and left. Afterwards
when he was walking down the street he wished he^d
remembered to ask her to give him back his seal ring,
but he didn^t go back to ask for it.
    That Sunday he went to eat at old man VogePs, but he
didn’t tell them he’d lost his job. It was a sudden hot
spring day. He’d been walking round all morning, with
a headache from getting tanked up with Hendriks the
night before, looking at the crocuses and hyacinths in the
parks and the swelling buds in the dooryards. He didn’t
know what to do with himself. He was a week overdue
on his rent and he wasn’t getting any schooling and he
hadn’t any girl and he felt like saying to hell with every-
thing and joining up in the militia to go down to the
Mexican border. His head ached and he was tired of
dragging his feet over the pavements in the early heat.
Welldressed men and women went by in limousines and
sedans. A boy flashed by on a red motorbike. He wished
he had the jack to buy a motorbike himself and go on a
trip somewhere. Last night he’d tried to argue Hendriks
into going South with him, but Hendriks said he’d picked
up with a skirt that was a warm baby and he was getting
his nookie every night and going to stay right with it.
To hell with all that, thought Charleys I want to see
some country.
    He looked so down in the mouth that Jim said, ^^What’s
the trouble, Charley?” when he walked into the garage.
^^Aw, nothing,” said Charley, and started to help clean
the parts of the carburetor of a Mack truck Jim was
        390

408
tinkering with. The truckdnver was a young feller with
closecropped black hair and a tanned face. Charley liked
his looks. He said he was going to take a load of store-
fittings down to Milwaukee next day and was looking for
a guy to go with him. ‘‘Would you take me.?” said
Charley. The truckdnver looked puzzled. “He’s my kid
                         he’ll be allright . . . But
brother, Fred 5                                           what about your
job?”
    Charley colored up. “Aw, I resigned.” “Well, come
round with me to see the boss,” said the truckdriver. “And
if it’s allright by him it’s allright by me.”
   They left next morning before day. Charley felt bad
about sneaking out on his landlady, but he left a note on
the table saying he’d send her what he owed her as soon
as he got a job. It was fine leaving the city and the mills
and grainelevators behind in the gray chilly early morn-
ing light. The road followed the river and the bluffs and
the truck roared along sloshing through puddles and
muddy ruts. It was chilly although the sun was warm
when it wasn’t behind the clouds. He and Fred hp d to
yell at each other to make their voices heard but they
told stories and chewed the fat about one thing and an-
other. They spent the night in LaCrosse.
    They just got into the hashjoint in time to order ham-
burger steaks before it closed, and Charley felt he was
making a hit with the waitress who was from Omaha and
whose name was Helen. She was about thirty and had a
tired look under the eyes that made him think maybe she
was kind of easy. He hung round until she closed up and
took her out walking and they walked along the river and
the wind was warm and smelt winey of sawmills and there
was a little moon behind fleecy clouds and they sat down
in the new grass where it was dark behind stacks of fresh-
cut lumber laid out to season. She let her head drop on his
shoulder and called him “baby boy.”
    Fred was asleep in the truck rolled up in a blanket on

                                                                               391

409
top of the sacking when he got back, Charley curled up

in his overcoat on the other side of the truck. It was cold
and the packingcases were uncomfortable to lie on but he
was tired and his face felt windburned, and he soon fell

asleep.
    They were off before day.
    The first thing Fred said was, ^^Well, did you make

her, kid^’^ Charley laughed and nodded. He felt good
and thought to himself he was damn lucky to get away
from the Twin Cities and Emiscah and that sonofabitchin’
foreman. The whole world was laid out in front of him
like a map, and the Mack truck roaring down the middle
of it and towns were waiting for him everywhere where
he could pick up jobs and make good money and find
goodlooking girls waiting to call him their baby boy.
    He didn^t stay long in Milwaukee. They didn^t need
any help in any of the garages so he got a job pearl-
diving in a lunchroom. It was a miserable greasy job with
long hours. To save money he didn’t get a room but
flopped in a truck in a garage where a friend of Jim’s was
working. He was planning to go over on the boat as soon
as he got his first week’s pay. One of the stiffs working in
the lunchroom was a wobbly named Monte Davis. He
got everybody to walk out on account of a freespeech fight
the wobblies were running in town, so Charley worked
a whole week and had not a cent to show for it and hadn’t
eaten for a day and a half when Fred came back with
another load on his Mack truck and set him up to a feed.
They drank some beer afterwards and had a big argu-
ment about strikes. Fred said all this wobbly agitation was
damn foolishness and he thought the cops would be doing
right if they jailed every last one of them. Charley said
that working stiffs ought to stick together for decent liv-
ing conditions and the time was coming when there’d be a
big revolution like the American revolution only bigger
and after that there wouldnft be any bosses and the work-
         392

410
ers would run Industry. Fred said he talked like a damn
foreigner and ought to be ashamed of himself and that a
white man ought to believe in individual liberty and if he
got a raw deal on one job he was goddam well able to
find another. They parted sore, but Fred was a gooc-
hearted guy and lent Charley five bucks to go over to
Chi with.
    Next day he went over on the boat. There were still
some yellowish floes of rotting ice on the lake that was a
very pale cold blue with a few whitecaps on it. Charley
had never been out on a big body of water before and
felt a little sick, but it was fine to see the chimneys and
great blocks of buildings, pearly where the sun hit them,
growing up out of the blur of factory smoke, and the
breakwaters and the big oreboats plowing through the
blue seas, and to walk down the wharf with everything
 new to him and to plunge into the crowd and the stream
 of automobiles and green and yellow buses blocked up by
 the drawbridge on Michigan Avenue, and to walk along
 in the driving wind looking at the shiny storewindows and
 goodlooking girls and windblown dresses.
     Jim had told him to go to see a friend of his who
 worked in a Ford servicestation on Blue Island Avenue
 but is was so far that by the time he got there the guy
 had gone. The boss was there though and he told Charley
 that if he came round next morning heM have a job foi
 him. As he didn^t have anywhere to go and didn’t like to
 tell the boss he was flat he left his suitcase in the garage,
 and walked around all night. Occasionally he got a few
 winks of sleep on a park bench, but he’d wake up stiff
 and chilled to the bone ^nd would have to run around to
 warm up. The night seemed never to end and he didn’t
 have a red to get a cup of coffee with in the morning, and
 he was there walking up and down outside an hour be-
 fore anybod^^ came to open up the servicestation in the
 morning.

                                                                                 393

411
    He worked at the Ford servicestation several weeks

until one Sunday he met Monte Davis on North Clark

Street and went to a wobbly meeting with him in front of
the Newberry Library. The cops broke up the meeting
and Charley didn’t walk away fast enough and before he
knew what had happened to him he’d been halfstunned
by a riotstick and shoved into the policewagon. He spent
the night in a cell with two bearded men who were blind
drunk and didn’t seem to be able to talk English any-
way. Next day he was questioned by a police magistrate
and when he said he was a garage mechanic a dick called
                                                                      the magistrate
up the servicestation to check up on him 5
discharged him, but when he got to the garage the boss
said he’d have no goddam I Won’t Works in this outfit
and paid him his wages and discharged him too.
    He hocked his suitcase and his good suit and made a

little bundle of some socks and a couple of shirts and
went round to see Monte Davis to tell him he was going
to hitchhike to St. Louis. Monte said there was a free-
speech fight in Evansvdle and he guessed he’d come along
to see what was doing. They went out on the train to
Joliet. When they walked past the prison Monte said the
sight of a prison always made him feel sick and gave him
a kind of a foreboding. He got pretty blue and said he
guessed the bosses’d get him soon, but that there’d be
others. Monte Davis was a sallow thinfaced youth from
Muscatine, Iowa. He had a long crooked nose and stut-
tered and didn’t remember a time when he hadn’t sold
papers or worked in a buttonfactory. He thought of noth-
ing but the I.W.W. and the revolution. He bawled
Charley out for a scissorbill because he laughed about
how fast the wobblies ran when the cops broke up the
meeting, and told him he ought to be classconscious and
take things serious.
    At the citylimits of Joliet they hopped a truck that
carried them to Peoria, where they separated because

         39^

412
Charley found a truckdriver he'd known m Chicago who
offered him a lift all the way to St. Louis. In St. Louis
things didn't seem to be so good, and he got into a row
with a hooker he picked up on Market Street who tried
to roll him, so as a guy told him there were plenty jobs to
be had in Louisville he began to beat his way East. Bj?
the time he got to New Albany it was hot as the hinges
of hellj he'd had poor luck on hitches and his feet were
swollen and blistered. He stood a long time on the bridge
looking down into the swift brown current of the Ohio,
too tired to go any further. He hated the idea of tramp-
ing round looking for a job. The river was the color of
                      he started to think about
gingerbread j                                        the smell of ginger-
cookies Lizzie Green used to make in his mother's kitchen
md he thought he was a damn fool to be bumming round
like this. He'd go home and plant himself among the
weeds, that's what he'd do.
    Just then a brokendown Ford truck came by running
on a flat tire. ^^Hey, you've got a flat," yelled Charley.
The driver put on the brakes with a bang. He was a big
hulletheaded man in a red sweater. ^What the hell is it

to you?" ^^Jez, I just thought you might not a noticed."
^^Ah notice everythin^, boy . . . ain't had nutten but
trouble all day. Wanta lift?" ^^Sure," said Charley. ^^Now,
Ah can't park on de bridge nohow . . . Been same god-
dam thing all day. Here Ah gits up early in de mornin'

b'fo' day and goes out to haul foa hawgsheads a tobacca
an de goddam nigger done lost de warehouse key. Ah
swear if Ah'd had a gun Ah'd shot de son of a bitch dead."
At the end of the bridge he stopped and Charley helped
him change the tire. “Where you from, boy?" he said

as he straightened up and brushed the dust off his pants.
“I'm from up in the Northwest," said Charley. “Ah reckon
                                                                                       I'm
you're a Swede, ain't yez?" Charley laughed. “No 5
a garage mechanic and lookin' for a job." “Pahl in, boy;

                                                                               395

413
we’ll go an’ see ole man Wiggins—he’s ma boss—^an’ see
what we can do.”
    Charley stayed all summer in Louisville working at tin;
Wiggins Repair Shops. He roomed with an Italian named
Grassi who’d come over to escape military service. Grassi
read the papers every day and was very much afraid the
U. S. would go into the war. Then he said he’d have to
hop across the border to Mexico. He was an anarchist and
a quiet sort of guy who spent the evenings singing lo'^

to himself and playing the accordion on the lodginghouse
steps. He told Charley about the big Fiat factories at
Torino where he’d worked^ and taught him to eat
spaghetti and drink red wine and to play Fumculi fumcula
on the accordion. His big ambition was to be an airplane
pilot. Charley picked up with a Jewish girl who worked
as sorter in a tobacco warehouse. Her name was Sarah
Cohen but she made him call her Belle. He liked her well
enough but he was careful to make her understand that
he wasn’t the marrying kind. She said she was a radical
and believed in free love, but that didn’t suit him much
either. He took her to shows and took her out walking
In Cherokee Park and bought her an amethyst brooch
when she said amethyst was her birthstone.
   When he thought about himself he felt pretty worried.
Here he was doing the same work day after day, with
no chance of making better money or getting any school-
ing or seeing the country. When winter came on he got
restless. He’d rescued an old Ford roadster that they
were going to tow out to the junkheap and had patched
it up with discarded spare parts.
    He talked Grassi into going down to New Orleans
with him. They had a little money saved up and they’d
run down there and get a job and be there for the Mardi
Gras. The first day that he’d felt very good since he left
St. Paul was the sleety January day they pulled out of
Louisville with the engine hitting on all four cylinders
         396

414
and a pde of thirdhand spare tires in the back, headed
soutln
    They got down through Nashville and Birmingham
and Mobile, but the roads were terrible and they had to
remake the car as they went along and they almost froze
to death in a blizzard near Guntersville and had to lay
over for a couple of days, so that by the time they’d
gotten down to Bay St, Louis and were bowling along the
shore road under a blue sky and feeling the warm sun and
seeing palms and bananatrees and Grassi was telling about
Vesuvio and Bella Napoli and his girl in Torino that he’d
never see again on account of the bastardly capitalista
war, their money had run out. They got into New
Orleans with a dollar five between them and not more
than a teacupful of gasoline in the tank, but by a lucky
break Charley managed to sell the car as it stood for
twentyfive dollars to a colored undertaker.
    They got a room in a house near the levee for three
dollars a week. The landlady was a yellowfaced woman
from Panama and there was a parrot on the balcony out-
side their room and the sun was warm on their shoulders
walking along the street. Grassi was very happy. ^^This

is lika the Italia,” he kept saying. They walked around
and tried to find out about jobs but they couldn’t seem
to find out about anything except that Mardi Gras was
next week. They walked along Canal Street that was
crowded with colored people, Chinamen, pretty girls in
brightcolored dresses, racetrack hangerson, tall elderly
men in palmbeach suits. They stopped to have a beer in
a bar open to the street with tables along the outside
where all kinds of men sat smoking cigars and drinking.
When they came out Grassi bought an afternoon paper-
He turned pale and showed the headline, war with
GERMANY IMMINENT. ^Tf America go to war with Ger-
many cops will arrest all Italian man to send back xc
kaly for fight, see? My friend tell who work in consolers

                                                                                397

415
ofEce, tell me, see^ I will not go fight In capitalista war.”

Charley tried to kid him along, but a worried set look
came over Grassi’s face and as soon as it was dark he left

Charley saying he was going back to the flop and going

to bed.
    Charley walked round the streets alone. There was s
warm molasses smell from the sugar refineries, whiffs of
gardens and garlic and pepper and oil cookery. There
seemed to be women everywhere, in bars, standing round

streetcorners, looking out invitingly behind shutters ajar

in all the doors and windows; but he had twenty dollars
on him and was afraid one of them might lift it off him,

so he just walked around until he was tired and then
went back to the room, where he found Grassi already
asleep with the covers over his head.
    It was late when he woke up. The parrot was squawking
on the gallery outside the window, hot sunlight filled the
room. Grassi was not there.
    Charley had dressed and was combing his hair w'hen
Grassi came In looking very much excited. He had taken a
berth as donkey-engineman on a freighter bound for South
America. “When I get Buenos Aires goodby and no more
war,” he said. “If Argentina go to war, goodby again.”
He kissed Charley on the mouth, and Insisted on giving
him his accordion and there were tears in his eyes when
he went off to join the boat that was leaving at noon.
    Charley walked all over town inquiring at garages and
machineshops if there was any chance of a job. The streets
were broad and dusty, bordered by low shuttered frame
houses, and distances were huge. He got tired and dusty
and sweaty. People he talked to were darned agreeable
but nobody seemed to know where he could get a job.
He decided he ought to stay through the Mardi Gras
anyway and then he would go up North again. Men he
talked to told him to go to Florida or Birmingham,
Alabama, or up to Memphis or Little Rock, but every-

         398

416
body agreed that unless he wanted to ship as a seaman
there wasn’t a job to be had in the city. The days dragged
along warm and slow and sunny and smelling of molasses
from the refineries. He spent a great deal of time reading
in the public library or sprawled on the levee watching
the niggers unload the ships. He had too much time to
think and he worried about what he was going to do with
himself. Nights he couldn’t sleep well because he hadn’t
done anything all day to tire him.
    One night he heard guitarmusic coming out of a join?
called “The Original Tripoli,” on Chartres Street. He
went in and sat down at a table and ordered drinks. Thf
waiter was a Chink. Couples were dancing in a kind of
wrestling hug in the dark end of the room. Charley de-
cided that if he could get a girl for less than five seeds
he’d take one on. Before long he found himself setting
up a girl who said her name was Liz to drinks and a feed.
She said she hadn’t had anything to eat all day. He asked
her about Mardi Gras and she said it was a bum time
because the cops closed everything up tight. “They
roimded up all the waterfront hustlers last night, sent
 every last one of them up the river.” “What they do
with ’em?” “Take ’em up to Memphis and turn ’em
 loose . . . ain’t a jail in the state would hold all the

 floosies in this town.” They laughed and had another
 drink and then they danced. Charley held her tight. She
 was a skinny girl with little pointed breasts and big hips.

 “Jez, baby, you’ve got some action,” he said after they’d
 been dancing a little while. “Ain’t it ma business to give
 the boys a good time?” He liked the way she looked at
 him. “Say, baby, how much do you get?” “Five bucks.”

 'Jez, I ain’t no millionaire . . . and didn’t I set you up
 to some eats?” “Awright, sugarpopperj make it three.”
     They had another drink. Charley noticed that she took
 some land of lemonade each time. “Don’t you ever drink

                                                                                 399

417
anything, Lizi”’ “You can’t drink in this game, dearie j
hrst thing you know I’d be givin’ it away.”
    There was a big drunken guy in a dirty undershirt
looked like a ship’s stoker reeling round the room. He
eot hold ol Liz’s hand and made her dance with him.
His big arms tattooed blue and red folded right round
her. Charley could see he was mauling and pulling at her
dress as he danced with her. “Quit that, you son of a
bitch,” she was yelling. That made Charley sore and he
went up and pulled the big guy away from her. The big
guy turned and swung on him. Charley ducked and
hopped into the center of the floor with his dukes up.
The big guy was blind drunk, as he let fly another hay-
maker Charley put his foot out and the big guy tripped
and fell on his face upsetting a table and a little dark
man with a black mustache with it. In a second the dark
man was on his feet and had whipped out a machete. The
Chinks ran round mewing like a lot of damn gulls. The
proprietor, a fat Spaniard in an apron, had come out from
behind the bar and was yellin’, “Git out, every last one
of you.” The man with the machete made a run at
Charley. Liz gave him a yank one side and before Charley
knew what had happened she was pulling him through
the stinking latrines into a passage that led to a back door
out into the street. “Don’t you know no better’n to git
in a fight over a goddam whore.?” she was saying in his
ear.
    Once out in the street Charley wanted to go back to
get his hat and coat. Liz wouldn’t let him. “I’ll get it
for you in the momin’,” she said. They walked along
the street together. “You’re a damn good girl; I like
you,” said Charley. “Can’t you raise ten dollars and make
it all night?” “Jez, kid, I’m broke.” “Well, I’ll have to
throw you out and do some more hustlin’, I guess .         .  .
There’s only one feller in this world gets it for nothin’ and
you ain’t him.”
        400

418
   They had a good time together. They sat on the edge
of the bed talking. She looked flushed and pretty in a
fragile sort of way in her pink shimmy shirt. She showed
him a snapshot of her steady who was second engineer on
a tanker. ''Ain't he handsome? I don't hustle when he's
in town. He's that strong . . . He can crack a pecan
with his biceps." She showed him the place on his arm
where her steady could crack a pecan.
    "Where you from?” asked Charley.
    "What's that to you?"
                                                I can tell by the way you
    "1 ou're from up North 5
talk."
    "Sure. I'm from Iowa, but Pll never go back there no
more . . . It's a hell of life, bo, and don't you forget

  . .  'Women of pleasure' my foot. I used to think I was
a classy dame up home and then I woke up one mornmg
and found I was nothing but a goddam whore.”
    "Ever been to New York?”
    She shook her head. "It ain't such a bad life if you keep
away from drink and the pimps,” she said thoughtfully,
    "I guess I'll shove off for New York right after Mardi
Gras. I can't seem to find me a master in this man'r
town.”
    "Mardi Gras ain't so much if you're broke,”
    "Well, I came down here to see it and I guess I'd
better see it.”

    It was dawn when he left her. She came downstairs
with him. He kissed her and told her he'd give het the
ten bucks if she got nis hat and coat back for him and
she said to xome around to her place that evening about

six, but not to go back to the "Tripoli” because that greaser
was a bad egg and would be laying for him.
    The streets of old stucco houses inset with lacy iron
balconies were brimful of blue mist. A few mulatto women
in bandanas were moving around in the courtyards. In
the market old colored men were laying out fruit me
                                                                               40 >

419
green vegetables. When he got back to his flop the
Panama woman was out on the gallery outside his room
holding out a banana and calling “Ven, Polly . . . Ven,
Polly,” in a little squeaky voice. The parrot sat on the
edge of the tiled roof cocking a glassy eye at her and
chuckling softly. ^‘Me here all night,” said the Panama
woman with a tearful smile. “PoUy no quiere come.”
Charley climbed up by the shutter and tried to grab the
parrot but the parrot hitched away sideways up to the
ridge of the roof and all Charley did was bring a tile
down on his head. “No quiere come,” said the Panama
woman sadly. Charley grinned at her and went into his
room, where he dropped on the bed and fell asleep.
    During Mardi Gras Charley walked round town till
his feet were sore. There were crowds everywhere and
lights and floats and parades and bands and girls running
round in fancy dress. He picked up plenty of girls but as
soon as they found he was flat they dropped him. He was
spending his money as slowly as he could. When he got
hungry he’d drop into a bar and drink a glass of beer
and eat as much free lunch as he dared.
   The day after Mardi Gras the crowds began to thin
out, and Charley didn’t have any money for beer. He
walked round feeling hungry and miserable; the smell of
molasses and the absinthe smell from bars in the French
Quarter in the heavy damp air made him feel sick. He
didn’t know what to do with himself. He didn’t have the
gumption to start off walking or hitchhiking again. He
went to the Western Union and tried to wire Jim collect,
but the guy said they wouldn’t take a wire, asking for
money collect.
    The Panama woman threw him out when he couldn’t
pay for another week in advance and there he was walking
down Esplanade Avenue with Grassi’s accordion on one
arm and his little newspaper bundle of clothes under the
other. He walked down the levee and sat down in 3
        402

420
grassy place in the sun and thought for a long time. It
was either throwing himself in the river or enlisting in
the army. Then he suddenly thought of the accordion.
An accordion was worth a lot of money. He left his bundle
of clothes under some planks and walked aroxmd to all
the hockshops he could find with the accordion, but they
wouldn’t give him more than fifteen bucks for it any-
where. By the time he’d been round to all the hockshops
and musicstores it was dark and everything had closed.
He stumbled along the pavement feeling sick and dopy
from hunger. At the corner of Canal and Rampart he
stopped. Singing was coming out of a saloon. He got the
hunch to go in and play Fumculi junicula on the accordion.
He might get some free lunch and a glass of beer out of it.
    He’d hardly started playing and the bouncer had just
vaulted across the bar to give him the bum’s rush, when
a tall man sprawled at a table beckoned to him.
    “Brother, you come right here an’ set down.” It was a
big man with a long broken nose and high cheekbones,
    “Brother, you set down.” The bouncer went back be-
hind the bar. “Brother, you can’t play that there accordeen
no mor’n a rabbit. Ah’m nutten but a lowdown cracker
from Okachobee City but if Ah couldn’t play no better’n
that . . .” Charley laughed. “I know I can’t play it
That’s all right.” The Florida guy pulled out a big wad
of bills, ‘brother, do you know what you’re going to
do? You’re going to sell me the goddam thing.              . . .
Ah’m nothin’ but a lowdown cracker, but, by Jesus
 Christ . . .”
     “Hey, Doc, be yourself .    . .You don’t want the dams
 thing.” His friends tried to make him put his money back.
     Doc swept his arm round with a gesture that shot three

 glasses onto the floor with a crash. “You turkey -buzzards

 talk in your turn . . . Brother, how much do you want

 for the accordeen?” The bouncer had come back and was
 standing threateningly over the table. “All right, Ben,”

                                                                                403

421
said Doc.           all on your Uncle Henry .        . . and let’s
 have another round a that good rye whisl^. Brother^ how
much do you want for it?”
    “Fifty bucks,” said Charley, thinking fast. Doc handed
him out five lens. Charley swallowed a drink, put the
accordion on the table and went off in a hurry. He was
afraid if he hung round the cracker ’ud sober up and try
to get the money back, and besides he wanted to eat.
    Next day he got a steerage passage on the steamer
Momus bound for New York. The river was higher than
the city. It was funny standing on the stern of the steam-
boat and looking down on the roofs and streets and trol-
leycars of New Orleans. When the steamer pulled out
from the wharf Charley began to feel good. He found
the colored steward and goi him to give him a berth in the
deckhouse. When he put his newspaper package under the
pillow he glanced down into the berth below. There lay
Doc, fast asleep, all dressed up in a light gray suit and a
straw hat with a burntout cigar sticking out of the corner
Df his mouth and the accordion beside him.
    They were passing between the Eads Jetties and feeling
the seawind in their (aces and the first uneasy swell of
the Gulf under their feet when Doc came lurching on
deck. He recognized Charley and went up to him with a
big hand held out. “Well, I’ll be a sonofabitch if there
ain’t the musicmaker . .    , That’s a good accordeen, boy.
/Ih thought you’d imposed on me bein’ only a poa country
lad an’ all that, but I’ll be a sonofabitch if it ain’t worth
the money. Have a snifter on mei^”
   They went and sat on Doc’s bunk and Doc broke out a
bottle of Bacardi and they had some drinks and Charley
                                                             if it wasn’t for that
told about how he’d been flat broke j
fifty bucks he’d still be sitting on the levee and Doc said
that if it wasn’t for that fifty bucks he’d be riding first--
class.
   Doc said he was going up to New York to sail for
        404

422
France in a volunteer ambulance corpse wasn’t ever’day
you got a chance to see a big war like that and he wanted

                                                                                       stil]
to get in on it before the whole thing went bellyup j
he didn’t like the idea of shooting a lot of whitemen he
didn’t have no quarrel with and reckoned this was the
best wayj if the Huns was niggers he’d feel different
about it.
    Charley said he was going to New York because he
thought there were good chances of schooling in a big
city like that and how he was an automobile mechanic and
wanted to get to be a C.E. or something like that because
there was no future for a working stiff without schooling.
    Doc said that was all mahoula and what a boy like him
ought to do was go and sign up as a mechanic in this here
ambulance and they’d pay fifty dollars a month an’ maybe
more and that was a lot of seeds on the other side and
he’d ought to see the goddam war before the whole thing
went bellyup.
    Doc’s name was William H. Rogers and he’d come
from Michigan originally and his old man had been a
grapefruit grower down at Frostproof and Doc had cashed
in on a couple of good crops of vegetables off the Ever-
glades muck and was going over to see the mademosels
before the whole thing went bellyup.
    They were pretty drunk by the time night fell and
were sitting in the stern with a seedylooking man in a
derby hat who said he was an Est from the Baltic. The
Est and Doc and Charley got up on the little bridge above
                                               the wind had gone down and
the afterhouse after supper j
it was a starlight night with a slight roll and Doc said,
^^By God, there’s somethin’ funny about this here boat

. .  Befoa we went down to supper the Big Dipper was
in the north, and now it’s gone right around to the south-
west.”

           is vat you vould expect of a kapitalistichesky so-

ciety,” said the Est. When he found that Charley had a

                                                                               405

423
red card and that Doc didn’t believe in shooting anything
but niggers he made a big speech about how revolution
had broken out in Russia and the Czar was being forced

to abdicate and that was the beginning of the regeneration

of mankind from the East. He said the Ests would get

their independence and that soon all Europe would be the

free sozialistitchesky United States of Europe under the
Red flag and Doc said, ^What did I tell yez, Charley?
The friggin’ business’ll go bellyup soon      .  .  . What you
want to do is come with me an’ see the war while it lasts.”
And Charley said Doc was right and Doc said, “I’ll take
you round with me, boy, an’ all you need do’s show your
driver’s license an’ tell ’em you’re a college student.”
    The Est got sore at that and said that it was the duty
of every classconscious worker to refuse to fight in this
war and Doc said, “We ain’t goin’ to fight, Esty, old
man. What we’ll do is carry the boys out before they
count out on ’em, see? I’d be a disappointed sonofabitch

if the whole business had gone bellyup befoa we gi^ there,
wouldn’t you, Charley?”
    Then they argued some more about where the Dipper
was and Doc kept saying it had moved to the south and
when they’d finished the second quart. Doc was saying
he didn’t believe in white men shootin’ each other up,
only niggers, and started going round the boat lookin’ for
that damn shine steward to kill him just to prove it and
che Est was singing The Marseillaise and Charley was
telling everybody that what he wanted to do was to get
m on the big war before it went bellyup. The Est and
Charley had a hard time holding Doc down in his bunk
when they put him to bed. He kept jumping out shout-
ing he wanted to kill a couple of niggers.
    They got into New York in a snowstorm. Doc said the
 Statue of Liberty looked like she had a white nightgown
->n. The Est looked around and hummed The Marseillaise
and said American cities were not artistical because they
         406

424
did not have gables on the houses like in Baltic Europe,
   When they got ashore Charley and Doc went to the
Broadway Central Hotel together. Charley had never
been in a big hotel like that and wanted to find a cheaper

flop but Doc insisted that he come along with him and

said he had plenty of jack for both of them and that it

was no use saving money because things would go bellyup

soon. New York was full of grinding gears and clanging

cars and the roar of the “L” and newsboys crying extras.
Doc lent Charley a good suit and took him down to the

 enlistment office of the ambulance corps that was in an
 important lawyer’s office in a big shiny officebuilding
 down in the financial district. The gentleman who signed

 the boys up was a New York lawyer and he talked about

 their being gentleman volunteers and behaving like gen-
 tlemen and being a credit to the cause of the Allies and

 the Amencan flag and civilization that the brave French

 soldiers had been fighting for so many years in the

 trenches. When he found out Charley was a mechanic

 he signed him up without waiting to write to the principal

  of the highschool and the pastor of the Lutheran church
  home in Fargo whose names he had given as references.
  He told them about getting antityphoid injections and a

  physical examination and said to call the next day to find

  out the sailing date. When they came out of the elevator

  there was a group of men in the shinymarble lobby with
                                                             the U. S. was at wai
  their heads bent over a newspaper 5
  with Germany. That night Charley wrote his mother that

  he was going to the war and please to send him fifty dol-

   lars. Then he and Doc went out to look at the town.

      There were flags on every building. They walked past

   business block after business block looking for Times

   Square. Everywhere people were reading newspapers. At

   Fourteenth they heard a drumbeat and a band and waited

   at the corner to see what regiment it would be but it was

   only the Salvation Army. By the time they got to Madison

                                                                                  407

425
           y




Square it was the dinner hour and the streets were de-

serted. It began to drizzle a little and the flags up Broad-
day and Fifth Avenue hung limp from their poles.
    They went into the Hofbrau to eat. Charley thought it

looked too expensive but Doc said it was his party. A man
was on a stepladder over the door screwing the bulbs into
an electric sign of an American flag. The restaurant was
draped with American flags inside and the band played
The Star-Sfangled Banner every other number, so that
they kept having to get to their feet. ^What do they think

this is, settin^ up exercises?” grumbled Doc.
   There was one group at a round table in the corner that
didn^t get up when the band played The Star-Sfmgled
Banner but sat there quietly talking and eating as if noth-
ing had happened. People round the restaurant began to
stare at them and pass comments.          bet theyVe .    . .
Huns . . . German spies . . . Pacifists.” There was an
army officer at a table with a girl who got red in the face
whenever he looked at them. Finally a waiter, an elderly
German, went up to them and whispered something.
   ^Tdl be damned if I will,” came the voice from the
table in the corner. Then the army officer went over to
them and said something about courtesy to our national
anthem. He came away redder in the face than ever. He
was a little man with bowlegs squeezed into brightly pol-
ished puttees. ^^Dastardly pro-Germans,” he sputtered as
he sat down. Immediately he had to get up because the
band played The Star-Sfangled Banner. ^Why don^t you
call the police, Cyril?” the girl who was with him said.
By this time people from all over the restaurant were ad-
vancing on the round table.
    Doc pulled Charley^s chair around. ^^Watch this; it^s
going to be good.”
    A big man with a Texas drawl yanked one of the men
out of his chair. ^^You git up or git out.”
              people have no right to interfere with us,” began
        408

426
one of the men at the round table. ^^You express your
approval of the war getting up, we express our disap-
proval by . .
   There was a big woman with a red hat with a plume
                                                                             don^t talk
on It at the table who kept saying, ^^Shut up 5
to ^em.” By this time the band had stopped. Everybody
clapped as hard as he could and yelled, ^Tlay it again ^
that’s right.” The waiters were running round nervously
and the proprietor was in the center of the floor mopping
his bald head.
    The army officer went over to the orchestra leader
and said, “Please play our national anthem again.” At the
first bar he came stiffly to attention. The other men rushed
the round table. Doc and the man with the English accent
were jostling each other. Doc squared off to hit him.
    “Come outside if you want to fight,” the man with the
English accent was saying.
    “Leave ’em be, boys,” Doc was shouting. “Pll take ’em
on outside, two at a time.”
    The table was upset and the party began backing off
towards the door. The woman with the red hat picked up
a bowl of lobster mayonnaise and was holding back the
crowd by chucking handfuls of it in their faces. At that,
moment three cops appeared and arrested the damn paci-

fists. Everybody stood around wiping mayonnaise off his
clothes. The band played The Star-Sfangled Bmner again
and everybody tried to sing but it didn’t make much of
an effect because nobody knew the words.
   After that Doc and Charley went to a bar to have a
whisky sour. Doc wanted to go to see a legshow and asked
the barkeep. A little fat man with an American flag in the
lapel of his coat overheard him and said the best legshow
in New York was Minsky’s on East Houston Street. He
set them up to some drinks when Doc said they were
going to see this here war, and said he’d take them down
to Minsky’s himself. His name was Segal and he said

                                                                              409

427
he’d been a socialist up to the sinking of the Lusitama, but
now he thought they ought to lick the Germans and de-

stroy Berlin. He was in the cloak and suit business and was
happy because he’d as good as landed a contract for army
aniforms. “Ve need the var to make men of us,” he’d say
and strike himself on the chest. They went down town

in a taxi but when they got to the burlesque show it was
so full they couldn’t get a seat.
    “Standin’ room, hell ... Ah want women,” Doc was
saying. Mr. Segal thought a little while with his head
cocked to one side. “Ve will go to ‘Little Hungary,’ ” he
said.
    Charley felt let down. He’d expected to have a good
time in New York. He wished he was in bed. At “Little
Hungary” there were many German and Jewish and Rus-
sian girls. The wine came in funnylooking bottles upside
down in a stand in the middle of each table. Mr. Segal
said it was his party from now on. The orchestra played
foreign music. Doc was getting pretty drunk. They sat at
a table crowded in among other tables. Charley roamed
round and asked a girl to dance with him but she wouldn’t
for some reason.
   He got to talking to a young narrowfaced fellow at the
bar who had just been to a peace meeting at Madison
WSquare Garden. Charley pricked his ears up when the fel-
      said there’d be a revolution in New York if they tried
to force conscription on the country. His name was Benny
Compton and he’d been studying law at New York Uni-
versity. Charley went and sat with him at a table with
another fellow who was from Minnesota and who was a
reporter on The Call. Charley asked them about the
chances of working his way through the engineering
school. He’d about decided to back out of this ambulance
proposition. But they didn’t seem to think there was much
chance if you hadn’t any money saved up to start on. The
        410

428
                                                                                    1



Minnesota man said New York was no place for a poor
man.
   ^^Awj hell^ I guess Pll go to the war/^ said Charley.
    “IPs the duty of every radical to go to jail first,” said
Benny Compton. “Anyway, there^ll be a revolution. Th^
working class won^t stand for this much longer.”
    “If you want to make some jack the thing to do is to
go over to Bayonne and get a job in a munitions factory,”
said the man from Minnesota in a tired voice.
    “A man who does that is a traitor to his class,” said
Benny Compton.
    “A working stiff’s in a hell of a situation,” said Charley.
“Damn it, I don’t want to spend all my life patchin’ up
tin lizzies at seventyfive a month.”
    “Didn’t Eugene V. Debs say, ^I want to rise with the
ranks, not from them?’ ”

    “After all, Benny, ain’t you studyin’ night an’ day to
get to be a lawyer an’ get out of the workin’ class?” said
the man from Minnesota.
    “That is so I can be of some use in the struggle ... I
 want to be a wellsharpened instrument. We must fight
capitalists with their own weapons.”
    “I wonder what I’ll do when they suppress The
    “They won’t dare suppress it.”
    “Sure, they will. We’re in this war to defend the Mor-
 gan loans . . . They’ll use it to clear up opposition at
 home, sure as my name’s Johnson.”
     “Talking of that, I got some dope. My sister, see, she’s
                                                              Ward Moorehouse,
 a stenographer . . . She works for J,
 the public relations counsel, you know ... he does
 propaganda for the Morgans and the Rockefellers. Well,
 she said that all this year he’s been working with a French
 secret mission. The big interests are scared to death of a
 revolution in France. They paid him ten thousand dollars
 for his services. He runs pro-war stuff through a feature
 syndicate. And they call this a free country.”

                                                                                41

429
    “I wouldn’t be surprised at anything,” said the man
from Minnesota, pouring himself out the last of the bottle

of wine. “Why, any one of us may be a government agent

or a spy right at this minute.” The three of them sat there
looking at each other. It gave Charley chills down his

spine.
    “That’s what I’m tryin’ to tell ye . . . My sister, she
knows all about it, see, on account of workin’ in this guy’s

office . . . It’s a plot of the big interests, Morgan an’
them, to defeat the workers by sendin’ ’em off to the war.
Once they get you in the army you can’t howl about civic

liberty or the Bill of Rights . . . They can shoot you
without trial, see?”
   “It’s an outrage . , . The people of the Northwest
won’t stand for it,” said the man from Minnesota. “Look
here, you’ve been out there more recently than I have
La Toilette expresses the opinion of people out there^,
don’t he?”
    “Sure,” said Charley.
    “Well, what the hell?”
    'Tt’s too deep for me,” said Charley and started work-
ing his way among the closepacked tables to find Doc,
Doc was pretty drunk, and Charley was afraid the evening
would start running into money, so they said goodby to
Mr. Segal who said please to HU a lot of Germans just
for him, and they went out and started walking west along
Houston Street. There were pushcarts all along the curb
with flares that made the packed faces along the sidewalk
glow red in the rainy darkness.
    They came out at the end of a wide avenue crowded
with people pouring out from a theater. In front of the
Cosmopolitan Cafe a man was speaking on a soapbox. As
the people came out of the theater they surged around
him. Doc and Charley edged their way through to see
what the trouble was. They could only catch scraps of
what the man was shouting in a hoarse barking voice:

430
          few days ago I was sittin^ in the Cooper Institute
listenin’ to Eugene Victor DebSj and what was he saym’r

. . . What is this civilization, this democracy that the
bosses are asking you workers to give your lives to
save, what does it mean to you except wageslavery, what

is  . .
    ^^Hey, shut up, youse ... If you don’t like it go back
where you came from,” came voices from the crowd.
    ^Treedom to work so that the bosses can get rich . . 
Opportunity to starve to death if you get fired from your
job.”
    Doc and Charley were shoved from behind. The man
toppled off his box and disappeared. The whole end of the
avenue filled with a milling crowd. Doc was sparring with
a big man in overalls. A cop came between them hitting

right and left with his billy. Doc hauled off to slam the
 cop but Charley caught his arm and pulled him out of the
 scrimmage.
     “Hey, for crissake, Doc, this ain’t the war yet,” said

 Charley. Doc was red in the face. ^^Ah didn’t like that

 guy’s looks,” he said.
     Behind the cops two policedepartment cars with big

 searchlights were charging the crowd. Arms, heads, hats,

 jostling shoulders, riotsticks rising and failing stood out

 black against the tremendous white of the searchlights.

 Charley pulled Doc against the plateglass window of the

 cafe.
     “Say, Doc, we don’t want to get in the can and lose the

 boat,” Charley whispered in his ear. “What’s the use?”

  said Doc. “It’ll all go bellyup before we get there.”
      “Today the voikers run before the cops, but soon it will

 be the cops run before the voikers,” someone yelled.

  Someone else started singing The Marseillaise. Voices

  joined. Doc and Charley were jammed with their shoul-

  ders against the plate glass. Behind them the cafe was full

  cf faces swimming in blue crinkly tobaccosmoke like^^

431
in an aquarium. The plate glass suddenly smashed. People
in the cafe were hopping to their feet. ^^Look out for the
Cossacks/’ a voice yelled.
    A cordon of cops was working down the avenue. The
empty pavement behind them widened. The other way
mounted police were coming out of Houston Street. In
the open space a patrrlwagon parked. Cops were shoving
men and women into it.
    Doc and Charley ducked past a mounted policeman who
was trotting his horse with a great clatter down the inside
of the sidewalk, and shot round the corner. The Bowery
was empty and dark. They walked west toward the hotel.
    “My God/’ said Charley, “you almost got us locked
up that time   .  . . I’m all set to go to France now, and
I wanter go.”
    A week later they were on the Chicago of the French
Line steaming out through the Narrows. They had hang-
overs from their farewell party and felt a little sick from
the smell of the boat and still had the music of the jazz-
band on the wharf ringing through their heads. The day
was overcast, with a low lid of leaden clouds, looked like
it was going to snow. The sailors were French and the
stewards were French. They had wine with their first
meal. There was a whole tableful of other guys going over
in the ambulance service.
   After dinner Doc went down to the cabin to go to sleep.
Charley roamed around the ship with his hands in his
pockets without knowing what to do with himself. In the
stern they were taking the canvas cover off the seventyfive
gun. He walked round the lowerdeck full of barrels and
packingcases and stumbled across coils of big fuzzy cable
to the bow. In the bow there was a little pmkfaced French
sailor with a red tassel on his cap stationed as a lookout.
   The sea was glassy, with dirty undulating patches of
weed and garbage. There were gulls sitting on the water
        414

432
or perched on bits of floating wood. Now and then a gull
stretched its wings lazily and flew off crying.
   The boat’s bluff bow cut two even waves through dense
glassgreen water. Charley tried to talk to the lookout. He
pointed ahead. “East/’ he said, “France.”
    The lookout paid no attention. Charley pointed back
towards the smoky west. “West/’ he said and tapped him 

self on the chest. “My home Fargo, North Dakota.” But
the lookout just shook his head and put his finger to hia

lips.
    “France very far east   . . . submarines . . . war/’ said
Charley. The lookout put his hand over his mouth. At
last he made Charley understand that he wasn’t supposed
to talk to him.



























                                                                               415


