
912
THE BIG MONEY

914
                                                               CONTENTS

CHARLEY ANDERSON                                                     3

       NEWSREEL XLiv Yankee Doodle that melodee       lO
CHARLEY ANDERSON                                                   ii

       NEWSREEL XLV ^Twam^t for fowder and for
           storebought hair                                                    i8
               THE AMERICAN PLAN                                     19

       NEWSREEL xLvi thcsc are the men for whom
           the rabid                                                                25

       The Camera Eye (43) throat tightens when
           the redstacked steamer                                         26

       NEWSREEL XLVii boy Seeking future offered         28

       The Camera Eye (44) the unnamed arrival               29
CHARLEY ANDERSON                                                   32

       NEWSREEL XLViii truly the Steel Corporation         46
               TIN LIZZIE                                                        47

       NEWSREEL XLix Jack 0^ Diamonds Jack d* Dia-
           monds                                                                   57
CHARLEY ANDERSON                                                   58

       NEWSREEL L Doidt blame it all on Broadway 91
               THE BITTER DRINK                                         93

       NEWSREEL LI The stmshine drifted from our
           alley                                                                     105
MARY FRENCH                                                             106

       The Camera Eye (45) the narrow yellow
           room teems with talk                                            125
                                                                                   V

915
^ARY FRENCH                                                              127

       The Camera Eye (46) walk the streets and
           walk the streets                                                   149

       NEWSREEL LI I assembled to a service for the
           dear departed                                                      152
               ART AND ISADORA                                        153

       NEWSREEL Liii Bye bye blackbird                          162
MARGO DOWLING                                                        163

       NEWSREEL Liv there was nothing significant
           about the morning’s trading                                 188
               ADAGIO DANCER                                           189

        NEWSREEL LV THRONGS IN STREETS             1 94
        The Camera Eye (47) sirens bloom in the fog
           over the harbor                                                     195
CHARLEY ANDERSON                                                  197

        NEWSREEL Lvi his first movc was to board a
            fast train for Miami                                              236

        The Camera Eye (48) westbound to Havana
            Puerto-Mexico Galveston                                    238
MARGO DOWLING                                                         243

        NEWSREEL Lvii the psychic removed all cloth-
            ing                                                                       255
 MARGO DOWLING                                                        256

        NEWSREEL Lviii In my dreams it always seems 277
                THE CAMPERS AT KITTY HAWK 278

         NEWSREEL Lix the strangcr first coming to De-
             troit                                                                      285
         VI

916
CHARLEY ANDERSON                                                           aS?

        NEWSREEL LX Was Cclinc to blame?                            32?
MARGO DOWLING                                                                 327

        NEWSREEL Lxi High high high uf in the hills 34*^

CHARLEY ANDERSON                                                           342

        NEWSREEL LXII STARS PORTEND EVIL                     378
MARGO DOWLING                                                                 379

        NEWSREEL LXiii but a fcw minutcs later this
             false land disappeared                                               42^
                 ARCHITECT                                                           428

        NEWSREEL LXIV WEIRD FISH DRAWN FROM
             SARGASSO SEA                                                       433

        The Camera Eye (49) walking from Plym-
             outh to North Plymouth                                               435

         NEWSREEL LXV STORM TIES UP SUBWAY J
             FLOODS AND LIGHTNING DARKEN CITY               437

MARY FRENCH                                                                       439

         NEWSREEL LXVI HOLMES DENIES STAY                  460

         The Camera Eye (50) they have clubbed us

             off the streets                                                              461

         NEWSREEL Lxvii when things are upset, there’s
             always chaos                                                               464

                 POOR LITTLE RICH BOY                                      466

RICHARD ELLSWORTH SAVAGE                                          477

         NEWSREEL LXVIII WALL STREET STUNNED             5^?

                                                                                           vii

917
       The Camera Eye (51) at the head of the val-
           ley in the dark of the hills                                     52'j

               POWER SUPERPOWER                                525

(VIARY FRENCH                                                            533

               VAG                                                                 559

918
                                 CHARLEY ANDERSON


    Charley Anderson lay in his bunK: in a glary red buzt,
Ohy Tiune^ damn that tune last night. He lay flat with
                     the tongue in his mouth was thick warm sour
his eyes hot 3
felt. He dragged his feet out from mider the blanket and
hung them over the edge of the bunk, big white feet with
                                       he let them drop to the red carpet
pink knobs on the toes 3
and hauled himself shakily to the porthole. He stuck his
head out.
    Instead of the dock, fog, little greygreen waves slap-
ping against the steamer’s scaling side. At anchor. A gull
screamed above him hidden in the fog. He shivered and
pulled his head in.
    At the basin he splashed cold water on his face and neck.
Where the cold water hit him his skin flushed pink.
    He began to feel cold and sick and got back into his
bunk and pulled the stillwarm covers up to his chin.
Home. Damn that tune.
    He jumped up. His head and stomach throbbed in time
now. He pulled out the chamberpot and leaned over it.
                     a little green bile came. No, I don’t want to
He gagged 3
puke. He got into his underclothes and the whipcord pants
of his uniform and lathered his face to shave. Shaving
made him feel blue. What I need’s a . . . He rang for the
steward. “Bonjour, m’sieur.” “Say, Billy, let’s have a dou-
ble cognac tootsuite.”
    He buttoned his shirt carefully and put on his tunic^
looking at himself iii the glass, his eyes had red rims and
his face looked green under the sunburn. Suddenly he
                                           a sour gagging was welling up
began to feel sick again 5
from his stomach to his throat. God, these French boats
stink. A knock, the steward’s frog smile and ^Woila,
m’sieur,” the white plate slopped with a thin amber spill-

                                                                                   3

919
ing out of the glass. “When do we dock^*^^ The steward
shrugged and growled, “La brume.”
    Green spots were still dancing in front of his eyes as he
went up the Imoleumsmelling companionway. Up on deck
the wet fog squeezed wet against his face. He stuck his
hands in his pockets and leaned into it. Nobody on deck,
a few trunks, steamerchairs folded and stacked. To wind-
ward everything was wet. Drops trickled down the brass-
nmmed windows of the smokmgroom. Nothing in any di-
 ection but fog.
    Next time around he met Joe Askew. Joe looked fine.
His little mustache spread neat under his thin nose. His
eyes were clear.
    “Isn’t this the damnedest note, Charley? Fog.”
    “Rotten,”
    “Got a head?”
    “You look topnotch, Joe.”
    “Sure, why not"^ I got the fidgets, been up since six

o’clock. Damn this fog, we may be here all day.”
    “It’s fog all right.”
   They took a couple of turns round the deck.
    “Notice how the boat stinks, Joe?”
    “It’s being at anchor, and the fog stimulates your smell-
ers, I guess. How about breakfast?” Charley didn’t say
anything for a moment, then he took a deep breath and
said, “All right, let’s try it.”
    The diningsaloon smelt of onions and brasspolish. The
Johnsons were already at the table. Mrs. Johnson looked
  ale and cool. She had on a little grey hat Charley hadn’t
seen before, all ready to land. Paul gave Charley a sickly
kind of smile when he said hello. Charley noticed how
Paul’s hand was shaking when he lifted the glass of
orangejuice. His lips were white.
    “Anybody seen Ollie Taylor?” asked Charley.
    “The major’s feelin’ pretty bad, I bet,” said Paul, gig-
gling-

        4

920
   ^^And how are you, Charley?” Mrs. Johnson intoned
sweetly.
   ^^Oh, Pm .   .  . Pm in the pink.”
    “Liar,” said Joe Askew.
    “Oh, I can’t imagine,” Mrs. Johnson was saying, “what
kept you boys up so late last night.”
    “We did some singing,” said Joe Askew.
    “Somebody I know,” said Mrs. Johnson, “went to bed
in his clothes.” Her eye caught Charley’s.
    Paul was changing the subject: “Well, we’re back in
God’s country.”
    “Oh, I can’t imagine,” cried Mrs. Johnson, “what
America’s going to be like.”
    Charley was bolting his wuffs avec du bakin and the
coffee that tasted of bilge.
    “What Pm looking forward to,” Joe Askew was say
ing, “is a real American breakfast.”
    “Grapefruit,” said Mrs. Johnson.
    “Cornflakes and cream,” said Joe.
    “Hot cornmufEns,” said Mrs. Johnson,
    “Fresh eggs and real Virginia ham,” said Joe.
    “Wheatcakes and country sausage,” said Mrs. Johnson.
    “Scrapple,” said Joe.
    “Good coffee with real cream,” said Mrs. Johnson,
 laughing.
     “You win,” said Paul with a sickly grin as he left the
 table.
     Charley took a last gulp of his coffee. Then he said he
 thought he’d go on deck to see if the immigration officers
 had come. “Why, what’s the matter with Charley He
 could hear Joe and Mrs. Johnson laughing together as he
 ran up the companionway.
     Once on deck he decided he wasn’t going to be sick. The
 fog had lifted a little. Astern of the Niagara he could sec
 the shadows of other steamers at anchor, and beyond, a
 rounded shadow that might be land. Gulls wheeled and

                                                                                    5

921
               overhead. Somewhere across the water a foghorn
groaned at intervals. Charley walked up forward and
leaned into the wet fog.
   Joe Askew came up behind him smoking a cigar and
took him by the arm: “Better walk, Charley,” he said.
“Isn’t this a hell of a note? Looks like little old New York
had gotten torpedoed during the late unpleasantness. . . .
I can’t see a damn thing, can you?”
    “I thought I saw some land a minute ago, but it’s gone
now.”
                                                              we’re anchored off
    “Musta been Atlantic Highlands 5
the Hook. . . . Goddam it, I want to get ashore.”
    “Your wife’ll be there, won’t she, Joe?”
    “She ought to be. . . . Know anybody in New York,
Charley?”
    Charley shook his head. “I got a long ways to go yet
before I go home. ... I don’t know what I’ll do when
I get there.”
    “Damn it, we may be here all day,” said Joe Askew.
   “Joe,” said Charley, “suppose we have a drink . . .
one final drink.”
   “They’ve closed up the damn bar.”
   They’d packed their bags the night before. There was
nothing to do. They spent the morning playing rummy in
the smokingroom. Nobody could keep his mind on the
game. Paul kept dropping his cards. Nobody ever knew
who had taken the last trick. Charley was trying to keep
his eyes off Mrs, Johnson’s eyes, off the little curve of her
neck where it ducked under the grey fur trimming of her
dress. “I can’t imagine,” she said again, “what you boys
found to talk about so late last night. ... I thought we’d
talked about everything under heaven before I went to
bed.”
    “Oh, we found topics but mostly it came out in the form
uf singing,” said Joe Askew.
    “I know I always miss things when I go to bed.” Char^
        6

922
ley noticed Paul beside him staring at her with pale loving
eyes.             she was saying with her teasing smilc; “it^s
just too boring to sit up,”
    Paul blushed, he looked as if he were going to cryj
Charley wondered if Paul had thought of the same thing
he’d thought of. “Well, let’s seej whose deal was it?” said
Joe Askew briskly.
    Round noon Major Taylor came into the smokingroom.
“Good morning, everybody. ... I know nobody feels
worse than I do. Commandant says we may not dock til]
tomorrow morning.”
    They put up the cards without finishing the hand
“That’s nice,” said Joe Askew.
    “It’s just as well,” said Ollie Taylor. “I’m a wreck.
The last of the harddrinking hardriding Taylors is a wreck.
We could stand the war but the peace has done us in,”
Charley looked up in Ollie Taylor’s grey face sagging in
the pale glare of the fog through the smokingroom win-
dows and noticed the white streaks in his hair and mus-
tache. Gosh, he thought to himself, Pm going to quit this
drinking.
    They got through lunch somehow, then scattered to
their cabins to sleep. In the corridor outside his cabin
Charley met Mrs, Johnson. “Well, the first ten days’ll be
the hardest, Mrs. Johnson.”
    “Why don’t you call me Eveline, everybody else does?”
Charley turned red.
    “What’s the use? We won’t ever see each other again.”
    “Why not?” she said. He looked into her long hazel
          the pupils widened till the hazel was all black.
eyes 5

. “Jesus, I’d like it if we could,” he stammered. “Don’t
think for a minute I . . .”

    She’d already brushed silkdly past him and was gone
down the comdor. He went into his cabin and slammed
the door. Kis bags were packed. The steward had put
away the bedclothes. Charley threw himself face down or

                                                                                    7

923
   ^'"striped mustysmelling ticking of the mattress. ^^God
damn that woman,” he said aloud.
   The rattle of a steamwinch woke him, then he heard
ihe jingle of the engineroom bell. He looked out the port-
hole and saw a yellow and white revenuecutter and, be-
yond, vague pink sunlight on frame houses. The fog was
             they were in the Narrows.
lifting 5
    By the time he’d splashed the aching sleep out of his
eyes and run up on deck, the Niagara was nosing her way
slowly across the greengrey glinting bay. The ruddy fog
was looped up like curtains overhead. A red ferryboat
crossed their bow. To the right there was a line of four-
and fivemasted schooners at anchor, beyond them a square-
rigger and a huddle of squatty Shipping Board steamers,
some of them still striped and mottled with camouflage.
Then dead ahead, the up and down gleam in the blur of
the tall buildings of New York.
    Joe Askew came up to him with his trenchcoat on and
his German fieldglasses hung over his shoulder. Joe’s blue
eyes were shining. “Do you see the Statue of Liberty yet,
Charley
                     yes, there she is. I remembered her lookin^
    “No .    .  .
bigger.”
    “There’s Black Tom where the explosion was.”
    “Things look pretty quiet, Joe.”
    “It’s Sunday, that’s why.”
    “It would be Sunday.”
    They were opposite the Battery now. The long spans
of the bridges to Brooklyn went off into smoky shadow
behind the pale skyscrapers.
    “Well, Charley, that’s where they keep all the moneyl
We got to get some of it away from ’em,” said Joe Askew,
tugging at his mustache.
    “Wish I knew how to start in, Joe.”
    They were skirting a long row of roofed slips. Joe held

924
out his hand.               Charley, write to me, kid, do you
hear? It was a great war while it lasted.’’
        sure will, Joe.”
   Two tugs were shoving the Niagara around into the
slip against the strong ebbtide. American and French flags
flew over the wharfbuilding, in the dark doorways were
groups of people waving. ^^There’s my wife,” said Joe
Askew suddenly. He squeezed Charley’s hand. ^‘^So long,
kid. We’re home.”
    First thing Charley knew, too soon, he was walking
down the gangplank. The transportofficer barely looked a*
                   the customsman sai^ ^^Well, I guess it’s good
his papers 3
to be home, lieutenant,” as he put the stamps on his grip.
He got past the Y man and the two reporters and the
                                                         the few people and the
member of the mayor’s committee 3
scattered trunks looked lost and lonely in the huge yellow
gloom of the wharfbuilding. Major Taylor and the John-
sons shook hands like strangers.
    Then he was following his small khaki trunk to a taxi-
cab. The Johnsons already had a cab and were waiting for
a stray grip. Charley went over to them. He couldn’t think
of anything to say. Paul said he must be sure to come to
see them if he stayed in New York, but he kept standing
in the door of the cab, so that it was hard for Charley to
talk to Eveline. He could see the muscles relax on Paul’s
jaw when the porter brought the lost grip. ^^Be sure and
look us up,” Paul said and jumped in and slammed the
door.
    Charley went back to his cab, carrying with him a last
glimpse of long hazel eyes and her teasing smile.         you
know if they still give oSicers special rates at the Mc-
Alpin?” he asked the taximan.
    ^^Sure, they treat you all right if you’re an of&cer. ,      .  .

If you’re an enlisted man you get your ass kicked,” an-
swered the taximanr out of the corner of his mouth and
slammed the gears.

                                                                                    9

925
   The taxi turned into a wide empty cobbled street. The
cab rode easier than the Paris cabs. The big warehouses and
marketbuildings were all closed up. ^^Gee, things look
pretty quiet here/’ Charley said, leaning forward to talk
to the taximan through the window.
    ^^Quiet as hell. ... You wait till you start to look for
a job,” said the taximan.
    “But, Jesus, I don’t ever remember things bein’ as quiet
as this.”
    “Well, why shouldn’t they be quiet.       . . . It’s Sunday,
ain’t It?”
    “Oh, sure, I’d forgotten it was Sunday.”
    “Sure it’s Sunday.”
    “I remember now it’s Sunday.”



                                                NEWSREEL XLIV


                          Yankee Doodle that melodee

 COLONEL HOUSE ARRIVES FROM EUROPE

                      APPARENTLY A VERY SICK MAN

                           Yankee Doodle that melodee

     TO CONQUER SPACE AND SEE DISTANCES

         but has not the time come for newspaper proprietors to
 join in a wholesome movement for the purpose of calming
 troubled minds, giving all the news but laying less stress on
 prospective calamities

               deadlock unbroken AS FIGHT SPREADS

         they permitted the Steel Trust Government to trample
  underfoot the democratic rights which they had so often been
  assured were the heritage of the people of this country
           10

926
     SHIPOWNERS DEMAND PROTECTION

                   Yankee doodle that melodee
                   Yankee doodle that melodee
                   Makes me stand right uf and cheer

       only survivors of crev7 of schooner Onato are put m jail
on arrival in Philadelphia

             PRESIDENT STRONGER WORKS IN SICKROOM
                         Pm coming US,A.
                                                          Pll say
                             MAY GAG PRESS

          There^s no land ,,, so grand

        Charles M. Schwab, who has returned from Europe, was
a luncheon guest at the White House. He stated that this
country was prosperous but not so prosperous as it should be,
because there were so many disturbing investigations on foot

                                                        .     . as my land
                    From Cakfornia to Manhattan Isle



                                  CHARLEY ANDERSON


    The ratfaced bellboy put down the bags, tried the fau-

cets of the washbowl, opened the window a little, put the
key on the Inside of the door and then stood at something
like attention and said, ^^Anything else, lootenant?” This

 is the life, thought Charley, and fished a quarter out of his

 pocket. ^^Thank you, sir, lootenant.” The bellboy shuffled

 his feet and cleared his throat. ^Tt must have been terrible

 overseas, lootenantd^ Charley laughed. ^^Oh, it was all

 right.^^ wish I coulda gone, lootenant.’^ The boy showed

                                                                                   II

927
a couple of ratteeth in a grin.        must be wonderful to oe
a hero,” he said and backed out the door.
    Charley stood looking out the window as he unbuttoned
his timic. He was high up. Through a street of grimy
square buildings he could see some columns and the roofs
of the new Penn station and beyond, across the trainyards,
a blurred sun setting behind high ground the other side of
the Hudson. Overhead was purple and pink. An el train
clattered raspingly through the empty Simdayevening

streets. The wind that streamed through the bottom of the
window had a gritty smell of coalashes. Charley put the
window down and went to wash his face and hands. The
hotel towel felt soft and thick with a little whiff of chlo-
ride. He went to the lookingglass and combed his hair.
Now what.?
    He was walking up and down the room fidgeting with
a cigarette, watching the sky go dark outside the window,
 when the jangle of the phone startled him. It was Ollie
 Taylor^s polite fuddled voice,             thought maybe you
wouldn’t know where to get a drink. Do you want to come
around to the club.?” ^^Gee, that’s nice of you, Ollie. I was
jus’ wonderin’ what a feller could do with himself in this
man’s town.” ^^You know it’s quite dreadful here,” Ollie’s
voice went on. “Prohibition and all that, it’s worse than
the wildest imagination could conceive. I’ll come and pick
you up with a cab.” “All right, Ollie, I’ll be in the lobby.”
    Charley put on his tunic, remembered to leave off his
Sam Browne belt, straightened his scrubby sandy hair
again, and went down into the lobby. He sat down in a
deep chair facing the revolving doors.
    The lobby was crowded. There was music coming from
somewhere in back. He sat there listening to the dance-
 tunes, looking at the silk stockings and the high heels and
 the furcoats and the pretty girls’ faces pinched a little by
 the wind as they came in off the street. There was an ex-
 pensive jingle and crinkle to everything. Gosh, it was
          12

928
great. The girls left little trails of perfume and a warm,
smell of furs as they passed him. He started counting up
how much jack he had. He had a draft for three himdred
bucks he’d saved out of his pay, four yellowbacked twentiei^
in the wallet in his inside pocket he’d won at poker on the
boat, a couple of tens, and let’s see how much change. Th(
coins made a little jingle in his pants as he fingered them
over.
    Ollie Taylor’s red face was nodding at Charley above a
big camelshair coat. “My dcctr boy. New York’s a wreck

. . . They are pouring icecream sodas in the Knicker-
bocker bar. .  . .” When they got into the cab together he
blew a reek of highgrade rye whiskey in Charley’s face.
“Charley, I’ve promised to take you along to dinner with
me. . .    . Just up to ole Nat Benton’s. You won’t mind

. .   . he’s a good scout. The ladies want to see a real flying
aviator with palms.” “You’re sure I won’t be buttin’ in,
Ollie?” “My dear boy, say no more about it.”
    At the club everybody seemed to know Ollie Taylor.
He and Charley stood a long time drinking Manhattans at
a darkpaneled bar in a group of whitehaired old gents
with a barroom tan on their faces. It was Major this and
Major that and Lieutenant every time anybody spoke to
Charley. Charley was getting to be afraid Ollie would get
too much of a load on to go to dinner at anybody’s house
    At last It turned out to be seventhirty, and leaving the
final round of cocktails, they got into a cab again, each of
them munching a clove, and started uptown. “I don’t
know what to say to ’em,” Ollie said. “I tell them I’ve just
spent the most delightful two years of my life, and they
make funny mouths at me, but I can’t help it.”
    There was a terrible lot of marble, and doormen in
green, at the apartmenthouse where they went out to din-
ner and the elevator was inlaid in different kinds of wood.
Nat Beni on, Ollie whispered while they were waiting for
the door to open, was a Wall Street broker.

                                                                                 13

929
   They were all in eveningdress waiting for them for
dinner in a pinkishcoJored drawingroom. They were evi-
dently old friends of Ollie’s because they made a great
fuss over him and they were very cordial to Charley and
brought out cocktails right away, and Charley felt like the
cock of the walk.
    There was a girl named Miss Humphries who was as
pretty as a picture. The minute Charley set eyes on her
Charley decided that was who he was going to talk to.
Her eyes and her fluffy palegreen dress and the powder in
the little he How between her shoulderblades made him
feel a little dizzy so that he didn’t dare stand too close to

her. Ollie saw the two of them together and came up and
pinched her ear. ^^Doris, you’ve grown up to be a raving
beauty.” He stood beaming teetering a little on his short

legs, ^^Hum .   .  . only the brave deserve the fair. . . .

It’s not every day we come home from the wars, is it,
Charley me boy?”
    ^Tsn’t he a darling?” she said when Ollie turned away.
^^We used to be great sweethearts when I was about six
and he was a collegeboy.” When they were all ready to go
into dinner Ollie, who’d had a couple more cocktails,
spread out his arms and made a speech. ^^Look at them,
lovely, intelligent, lively American women. .          . , There
was nothing like that on the other side, was there, Char-
ley? Three things you can’t get anywhere else in the
world, a good cocktail, a decent breakfast, and an American
girl, God bless ’em.” ^^Oh, he’s such a darling,” whispered
Miss Humphries in Charley’s ear.
    There was silverware in rows and rows on the table and
a Chinese bowl with roses in the middle of it, and a group
of giltstemmed wineglasses at each place. Charley was re-
lieved when he found he was sitting next to Miss Hum-
phries. She was smiling up at him. ‘^^Gosh,” he said, grin-
nmg into her face,        hardly know how to act ” ^Tt must

         14

930
be a change . . . from over there. But just act naturai
That^s what I do.”
    ^^Oh, noj a feller always gets into trouble when he acts
natural.”
    She laughed. “Maybe youVe right.   . .   . Oh, do tell me
what it was really like over there. . .          . Nobodydl ever

tell me everything.” She pointed to the palms on his Croix
de Guerre. “Oh, Lieutenant Anderson, you must tell me
about those.”
    They had white wine with the fish and red wine with
the roastbeef and a dessert all full of whippedcream.
Charley kept telling himself he mustn’t drink too much so
that he’d be sure to behave right.
    Miss Humphries’ first name was Doris. Mrs. Benton
called her that. She’d spent a year in a convent in Paris
before the war and asked him about places she’d known,
the church of the Madeleine and Rumpelmayers and the
pastryshop opposite the Comedie Frangaise. After dinner
she and Charley took their coffeecups into a windowbay
behind a big pink begonia in a brass pot and she asked him

if he didn’t think New York was awful. She sat on the
windowseat and he stood over her looking past her white
shoulder through the window down at the traffic in the
street below. It had come on to rain and the lights of the
cars made long rippling streaks on the black pavement of
Park Avenue. He said something about how he thought
home would look pretty good to him all the same. He was
wondering if it would be all right if he told her she had
beautiful shoulders. He’d just about gotten around to it
when he heard Ollie Taylor getting everybody together
to go out to a cabaret. “I know it’s a chore,” Ollie was
saying, “but you children must remember it’s my first
night in New York and humor my weakness.”
    They stood in a group under the marquee while the
doorman called taxicabs. Doris Humphries in her long
eveningwrap with fur at the bottom of it stood so dose to

                                                                                  15

931
Charley her shoulder touched his arm. In the lashing
rainy wind off the street he could smell the warm perfume
she wore and her furs and her hair. They stood back while
the older people got into the cabs. For a second her hand
was in his, very little and cool as he helped her into the

cab. He handed out a half a dollar to the doorman who
had whispered ^^ShanleyV’ to the taxidriver in a serious

careful flunkey’s voice.
    The taxi was purring smoothly downtown between the

tall square buildings. Charley was a little dizzy. He didn’t
dare look at her for a moment but looked out at faces, cars,

trafflccops, people in raincoats and umbrellas passing
against drugstore windows.
    ^^Now tell me how you got the palms.”
    ^^Oh, the frogs just threw those in now and then to keep
the boys cheerful.”
    ^^How many Huns did you bring down?”
    ^Why bring that up?”
    She stamped her foot on the floor of the taxi. ^^Oh, jlio-
body’ll ever tell me anything. ... I don’t believe you
were ever at the front, any of you.” Charley laughed. His
throat was a little dry. ^Well, I was over it a couple of
times.”
    Suddenly she turned to him. There were flecks of light
 in her eyes in the dark of the cab. ^^Oh, I understand. . . .
Lieutenant Anderson, I think you flyers are the finest
people there are.” ^^Miss Humphries, I think you’re a

 . .   . humdinger. ... I hope this taxi never gets to this
 dump .   . . wherever it is we’re goin’.” She leaned her
 shoulder against his for a second. He found he was holding
 her hand. ^^After all, my name is Dons,” she said in a tiny
 babytalk voice.
     “Doris,” he said. “Mine’s Charley.”
     “Charley, do you like to dance?” she asked in the same
 tiny voice. “Sure,” Charley said, giving her hand a quick
          i6

932
squeeze. Her voice melted like a little tiny piece of candy-
^‘Me too. .   .  . Ohj so much.”
   When they went in the orchestra was playing Darda-
nelles* Charley left his trenchcoat and his hat in the check-
room. The headwaiter’s heavy grizzled eyebrows bowed
over a white shirtfront. Charley was following Doris’s
slender back, the hollow between the shoulderblades where
his hand would like to be, across the red carpet, between
the white tables, the men’s starched shirts, the women’s
shoulders, through the sizzly smell of champagne and
welshrabbit and hot chafingdishes, across a corner of the
dancefloor among the swaying couples to the round white
table where the rest of them were already settled. The
knives and forks shone among the stiff creases of the fresh
tablecloth.
    Mrs. Benton was pulling off her white kid gloves look-
ing at Ollie Taylor’s purple face as he told a funny story.
^^Let’s dance,” Charley whispered to Doris. ^^Let’s dance
all the time.”
    Charley was scared of dancing too tough so he held her
a little away from him. She had a way of dancing with her
eyes closed ^^Gee, Doris, you are a wonderful dancer.”
When the music stopped the tables and the cigarsmoke and
the people went on reeling a little round their heads. Doris
was looking up at him out of the corners of her eyes. “I
bet you miss the French girls, Charley. How did you like
the way the French girls danced, Charley?”
    ^^Terrible.”
    At the table they were drinking champagne out of
breakfast coffeecups. Ollie had had two bottles sent up
from the club by a messenger. When the music started
again Charley had to dance with Mrs. Benton, and then
with the other lady, the one with the diamonds and the
 spare tire round her waist. He and Doris only had two
 more dances together. Charley could see the others wanted
to go home because Ollie was getting too tight. He had a

                                                                                  17

933
                                                                                                       y




flask of rye on his hip and a couple of times had beckoned
Charley out to have a swig in the cloakroom with him.
Charley tongued the bottle each time because he was hop-
ing he’d get a chance to take Doris home.
    When they got outside it turned out she lived in the
                                                        Charley cruised around on
same block as the Bentons did 5
the outside of the group while the ladies were getting their
wraps on before going out to the taxicab, but he couldn’t
get a look from her. It was just, “Goodnight, Ollie dear,
goodnight. Lieutenant Anderson,” and the doorman slam-
ming the taxi door. He hardly knew which of the hands
he had shaken had been hers.



                                                       NEWSREEL XLV


             ^Twarnh for powder and for storehought hair
                 De man 1 love would not gone nowhere

         if one should seek a simple explanation of his career it
would doubtless be found in that extraordinary decision to for-
sake the ease of a clerkship for the wearying labor of a section
hand. The youth who so early m life had so much of judgment
and willpower could not fail to rise above the general run of
men. He became the intimate of bankers

             &t. Louis woman wld her diamond rings
                 Pulls dat man around by her afron strings

         Tired of walkings riding a bicycle or riding in streetcars
 he is likely to buy a Ford^

     DAYLIGHT HOLDUP SCATTERS CROWD

         Just as soon as his wife discovers that every Ford is like
 every other Ford and that nearly everyone has oncy she is likely
 to Influence him to stef into the next social groufy of which
 the Dodge is the moit conspicuous examfle,
           i8

934
               DESPERATE REVOLVER BATTLE FOLLOWS

       The next stef comes when daughter comes hack from col*
lege and the family moves Into a new home» Father wants
economy. Mother craves offortunhy for her childreny daugh'*
ter desires social frestige and son wants travely sfeedy get-uf^
and'-go.
  MAN SLAIN NEAR HOTEL MAJESTIC BY
                          THREE FOOTPADS

               1 hate to see de evenin sun go down
                   Hate to see de evenin sun go down
                       Cause my baby he done lef dts town

       such exploits may indicate a dangerous degree of bravado
but they display the qualities that made a boy of high school
age the acknowledged leader of a gang tliat has been a thorn
in the side of the State of



                                THE AMERICAN PLAN


         Frederick Winslow Taylor (they called him
Speedy Taylor in the shop) was born in Germantown,
Pennsylvania, the year of Buchanan’s election. His
father was a lawyer, his mother came from a family of
                                        she was a great reader of Emer-
New Bedford whalers ;
son, belonged to the Unitarian Church and the Brown-
ing Society. She was a fervent abolitionist and believed
                                           she was a housekeeper of the
in democratic manners j
old school, kept everybody busy from dawn till dark.
She laid down the rules of conduct:
        selfrespect, selfreliance, selfcontrol
         and a cold long head for figures.
         But she wanted her children to appreciate the finer
things so she took them abroad for three years on the

                                                                                   19

935
Continent, showed them cathedrals, grand opera, Ro-
man pediments, the old masters under their brown
varnish in their great frames of tarnished gilt.
        L^ter Fred Taylor was impatient of these wasted
years, stamped out of the room when people talked
about the finer thingsj he was a testy youngster, fond
of practical jokes and a great hand at rigging up con-
traptions and devices.
         At Exeter he was head of his class and captain of
the ballteam, the first man to pitch overhand. (When
umpires complained that overhand pitching wasn’t in
the rules of the game, he answered that it got results.)
         As a boy he had nightmares, going to bed was
horrible for himj he thought they came from sleeping
on his back. He made himself a leather harness with
wooden pegs that stuck into his flesh when he turned
over. When he was grown he slept in a chair or in bed
in a sitting position propped up with pillows. All his
life he suffered from sleeplessness.
         He was a cracker] ack tennisplayer. In i88i, with
his friend Clark, he won the National Doubles Cham-
pionship. (He used a spoonshaped racket of his own
design.)



         At school he broke down from overwork, his eyes
went back on him. The doc^'or suggested manual labor.
 So Instead of going to Harvard he went into the
 machineshop of a small pumpmanufacturing concern,
 owned by a friend of the family’s, to learn the trade
 of patternmaker and machinist. He learned to handle
 a lathe and to dress and cuss like a workingman.
          Fred Taylor never smoked tobacco or drank
 liquor or used tea or coffee; he couldn’t understand
 why his fellowmechanics wanted to go on sprees and
 get drunk and raise Cain Saturday nights. He lived at
          20

936
home, when he wasn’t reading technical books he’d
play parts in amateur theatricals or step up to the piano
in the evening and sing a good tenor in A Warrior
Bold or A S'pcmish Cavalier.
        He served his first year’s apprenticeship in the
                                              the next two
machineshop without pay ;                          years he made
a dollar and a half a week, the last year two dollars.


        Pennsylvania was getting rich off iron and coal.
When he was twentytwo, Fred Taylor went to work at
the Midvale Iron Works. At first he had to take a
clerical job, but he hated that and went to work with
a shovel. At last he got them to put him on a lathe.
He was a good machinist, he worked ten hours a day
and in the evenings followed an engineering course at
Stevens. In six years he rose from machinist’s helper to
keeper of toolcribs to gangboss to foreman to master-
mechanic in charge of repairs to chief draftsman and
director of research to chief engineer of the Midvale
Plant.



        The early years he was a machinist with the other
machinists in the shop, cussed and joked and worked
with the rest of them, soldiered on the job when they
did. Mustn’t give the boss more than his money’s
worth. But when he got to be foreman he was on the
management’s side of the fence, gathering tn on the
fart of those on the management’s side all the great
mass of traditional knowledge which in the fast has
been in the heads of the workmen and in the fhysical
skill and knack of the workman. He couldn’t stand to
see an idle lathe or an idle man.
        Production went +0 his head and thrilled his sleep-
less nerves like liquor or women on a Saturday night.
                                                                                 21

937
                                                                                             y




He never loafed and he’d be damned if anybody else
would. Production was an itch under his skin.
        He lost his friends in the shop; they called him
niggerdriver. He was a stockily built man with a tem-
per and a short tongue.
        I was a young man in years but I give you my
word I was a great deal older than I am noWy what
with the worryy meanness and contemftMeness of the
whole damn thing. Ids a horrid life for any man to
live not being able to look any workman in the face
without seeing hostility there^ and a feeling that every
man around you is your virtual enemy.



         That was the beginning of the Taylor System of
Scientific Management.
         He was impatient of explanations, he didn’t care
whose hide he took off in enforcing the laws he believed
inherent in the industrial process.
         When starting an experiment in any field question
everythmgy question the very foundations upon which
the art restsy question the simplesty the most selfevidenty
the most universally accepted facts; prove everythmgy
         except the dominant Quaker Yankee (the New
Bedford skippers were the greatest niggerdrivers on
the whaling seas) rules of conduct. He boasted he’d
 never ask a workman to do anything he couldn’t do.
         He devised an improved steamhammer; he stand-
 ardized tools and equipment, he filled the shop with
 college students with stopwatches and diagrams, tabu-
 lating, standardizing. There^s the right way of doing a
 thing and the wrong way of doing it; the right way
 means increased productiony lower costsy higher wages
 bigger profits: the American plan.
          He broke up the foreman’s job into separate func-
          22

938
tions, speedbosses, gangbosses, timestudy men, orderof-
work men.
        The skilled mechanics were too stubborn for him,
what he wanted was a plain handyman who’d do what
he was told. If he was a firstclass man and did firstclass
work Taylor was willing to let him have firstclass payj
that’s where he began to get into trouble with the
owners.



        At thirtyfour he married and left Midvale and
took a flyer for the big money in connection with a
pulpmill started in Maine by some admirals and po-
litical friends of Grover Cleveland’s j
        the panic of ’93 made hash of that enterprise,
        so Taylor invented for himself the job of Con-
sulting Engineer in Management and began to build
up a fortune by careful investments.
        The first paper he read before the American So-
ciety of Mechanical Engineers was anything but a suc-
cess, they said he was crazy. I have jound, he wrote in
 1909, that any improvement is not only opposed but
aggressively and bitterly opposed by the ma-jority of
men.
         He was called in by Bethlehem Steel. It was in
Bethlehem he made his famous experiments with han-
dling pigironj he taught a Dutchman named Schmidt
 to handle fortyseven tons instead of twelve and a half
 tons of pigiron a day and got Schmidt to admit he
 was as good as ever at the end of the day.
         He was a crank about shovels, every job had to
 have a shovel of the right weight and size for that job
 alone} every job had to have a man of the right weight
 and size for that job alone} but when he began to pay

 his men in proportion to the increased efficiency of their
 work,
                                                                                  23

939
         the owners who were a lot of greedy smalleyed
Dutchmen began to raise Hail Columbia; when Schwab
bought Bethlehem Steel in 1901
         Fred Taylor
        inventor of efficiency
        who had doubled the production of the stamping-
mill by speeding up the main lines of shafting from
ninetysix to twohundred and twentyfive revolutions a
minute
        was unceremoniously fired.



        After that Fred Taylor always said he couldn’t af-
ford to work for money.
        He took to playing golf (using golfclubs of his
own design), doping out methods for transplanting
huge boxtrees into the garden of his home.
        At Boxly in Germantown he kept open house for
engineers, factorymanagers, industrialists;
        he wrote papers,
        lectured in colleges,
        appeared before a congressional committee,
        everywhere preached the virtues of scientific man-
agement and the Barth slide rule, the cutting down of
waste and idleness, the substitution for skilled mechanics
of the plain handyman (like Schmidt the pigiron
handler) who’d move as he was told
        and work by the piece:
        production;
        more steel rails more bicycles more spools of
thread more armorplate for battleships more bedpans
more barbedwire more needles more lightningrods
more ballbearings more dollarbiUs;
         (the old Quaker families of Germantown were
growing rich, the Pennsylvania millionaires were breed-
ing billionaires out of iron and coal)

         24

940
         production would make every firstclass American
 rich who was willing to work at piecework and not
 drink or raise Cain or think or stand mooning at his
lathe.
         Thrifty Schmidt the pigiron handier can invest his
money and get to be an owner like Schwab and the rest
of the greedy smalleyed Dutchmen and cultivate a
taste for Bach and have hundredyearold boxtrees in his
garden at Bethlehem or Germantown or Chestnut Hill,
         and lay down the rules of conduct,
         the American plan.
         But Fred Taylor never saw the working of the
American plan 5
         in 1915 be went to the hospital in Philadelphia
suffering from a breakdown.
        Pneumonia developed} the nightnurse heard him
winding his watch,
        on the morning of his fiftyninth birthday, when
the nurse went into his room to look at him at four-
thirty,
        he was dead with his watch in his hand.



                                               NEWSREEL XLVl


       these are the men for whom the rabid lawless, anarchistic
element of society in this country has been laboring ever since
sentence was imposed, and of late they have been augmented
by many good lawabiding citizens who have been misled by the
subtle arguments of those propagandists

               The times are hard and the wages low
                   Leave her Johnny leave her
               The bread Is hard and the beej is salt
                   It^s time for us to leave her

941
      BANKERS HAIL ERA OF EXPANSION

        PROSPERITY FOR ALL SEEN ASSURED

 Find German Love of Caviar a Danger to Stable Money

                      EX-SERVICE MEN DEMAND JOBS

            No one knows
                No one cares tf Pm weary
            Oh how soon they forgot Chateau-Thierry
WE FEEL VERY FRIENDLY TOWARDS THE
    TYPEWRITER USERS OF NEW YORK CITY

                          JOBLESS RIOT AT AGENCY

                             Shtfs in de oceans
                                Rocks in de sea
                            Blond'-headed woman
                                Made a jool outa me



                              THE CAMERA EYE (43)


       throat tightens when the redstacked steamer churn-

ing the faintlyheavmg slatecolored swell swerves shaking

ir long greenmarbled curve past the red lightship

        spine stiffens with the remembered chill of the off-

shore Atlantic

        and the jag of framehouses in the west above the

invisible land and spiderweb rollercoasters and the chew-
inggum towers of Coney and the freighters with their

stacks way aft and the blur beyond Sandy Hook
        and the smell of saltmarshes warmclammysweet

         26

942
       remembered bays silvery inlets barred with trestles

       the put put before day of a gasolineboat way up the

creek

       raked masts of bugeyes against straight tall pines on

the shellwhite beach

       the limeycold reek of an oysterboat in winter


       and creak of rockers on the porch of the scrollsaw cot-

tage and uncles’ voices pokerface stories told sideways out

of the big mouth (from Missouri who took no rubber

nickels) the redskin in the buffalorobe selling snakeroot in

the flare of oratorical redfire the sulphury choke and the

hookandladder clanging down the redbrick street while the

clinging firemen with uncles’ faces pull on their rubbercoats


       and the crunch of whitecorn muffins and coffee with

cream gulped in a hurry before traintime and apartment-

house mornings stifling with newspapers and the smooth

powdery feel of new greenbacks and the whack of a cop’s

billy cracking a citizen’s skull and the faces blurred with

newsprint of men in jail

        the whine and shriek of the buzzsaw and the tipsy

smell of raw lumber and straggling through slagheaps

through fireweed through wasted woodlands the shanty-

towns the shantytowns

        what good burying those years in the old graveyard

by the brokendown brick church that morning in the spring

                                                                                 27

943
when the sandy lanes were streaked with blue puddles and

the air was violets and pineneedles

        what good burying those hated years in the latrine-

stench at Brocourt under the starshells

         if today the crookedfaced customsinspector with the

soft tough talk the burring speech the funnypaper antics

thick hands jerking thumb

         (So you brought home French books didjer?)

         is my uncle



                                                  NEWSREEL XLVII


        boy seeking ruture offered opportunity        .  .   . good posi-
tions for bright .      .  . chance for advancement              . .   . boy
to learn   . . . errand boy      .  . . office boy

                                YOUNG MAN WANTED

                                   Oh tell me horn long
                                       ril have to wait

                                   OPPORTUNITY

         in bank that chooses its officers from the ranks, for wide-
awake ambitious bookkeeper *        .  . architectural draftsman
with experience on factory and industrial buildings in brick,
timber, and reinforced concrete      . . , bronze fitter . .           , let-
terer * .     , patternmaker   .  .   . carriage painter . .      . first class
striper and finisher .      .   . young man for hosiery, underwear
and notion house      .  .  . assistant in order department .          .  .

first class penman accurate at figures         .  .  . energetic hard-
 v/orker for setting dies m power presses for metal parts
         canvasser . . . flavor chemist . . . freight elevator man

 o . . house salesman . . * insurance man                   . insurance
          28

944
                                                  jeweler   . .    . laborer   .  . . ma-
man .  . invoice clerk       .  . .
chinist . .    . milling machine man        .  . . shipping clerk      . . ,

shipping clerk   .   .  . shipping clerk     . . . shoe salesman     . . .

signwriter .    .   . solicitor for retail fishmarket           .  .  . teacher

.  .  . timekeeper    .  ,  , tool and diemaker, tracer, toolroom
foreman, translator, typist    .  .  . window trimmer      ,   . . wrap-
per
                                    OPPORTUNITY FOR
                                  Do I get it now
                                       Or must I hesitate

   young man not afraid of hard work
              young man for office
                         young man for stockroom
                                    young man as stenographer
                                                 young man to travel
                                                                young man to learn
                                  OPPORTUNITY
                                 Oh tell me how long

        to superintend municipal light, water and ice plant in
beautiful growing, healthful town in Florida’s highlands          .  .  .

to take charge of underwear department in large wholesale
mail house ... to assist m railroad investigation ... to take
charge of about twenty men on tools, dies, gigs and gauges
... as bookkeeper in stockroom ... for light porter work

.  . . civil engineer . .        . machinery and die appraiser        .   .  .

building estimator   .  .   . electrical and power plant engineer



                                  THE CAMERA EYE (u)


        the unnamed arrival

         (who had hung from the pommel of the unshod

white stallion’s saddle

        a full knapsack
                                                                                          29

945
        and leaving the embers dying in the hollow of the

barren Syrian hills where the Agail had camped when

fiawn sharpshining cracked night off the ridged desert had

ridden towards the dungy villages and the patches of ses-

ame and the apncotgardens)

        shaved off his beard in Damascus

        and sat drinking hot milk and coffee in front of the

hotel in Beirut staring at the white hulk of Lebanon

fumbling with letters piled on the table and clipped

streamers of newsprint

        addressed not to the unspeaker of arabic or the clumsy

scramblerup on camelback so sore in the rump from riding

       but to someone

       who

        (but this evening in the soft nightclimate of the

Levantine coast the kind officials are contemplating further

improvements

       scarcelybathed he finds himself cast for a role pro-

vided with a white tie carefully tied by the viceconsul

stuffed into a boiled shirt a tailcoat too small a pair of

dresstrousers too large which the kind wife of the kind offi-

cial gigglingly fastens in the back with safetypins which

immediately burst open when he bows to the High Com-

missioner’s lady        faulty costuming makes the role of

eminent explorer impossible to play            and the patent

leather pumps painfully squeezing the toes got lost under

the table during the champagne and speeches)

        30

946
       who arriving in Manhattan finds waiting again the

forsomebodyelsetailored dress suit

       the position offered the opportunity presented the col-

larbutton digging into the adamsapple while a wooden

image croaks down a table at two rows of freshlypressed

gentlemen who wear fashionably their tailored names

        stuffed into shirts to caption miles lightyears of

clipped streamers of newsprint

        Gentlemen I apologize it was the wrong bell it was

due to a misapprehension that I found myself on the stage

when the curtain rose the poem I recited in a foreign lan-

guage was not mine in fact it was somebody else who was

speaking iris not me in uniform in the snapshot iris a

lamentable error mistaken identity the servicerecord was

lost the gentleman occupying the swivelchair wearing the

red carnation is somebody else than

        whoever it was who equipped with false whiskers was

standing outside in the rainy street and has managed un-

detected to make himself scarce down a manhole

        the pastyfaced young man wearing somebody else^s

 readymade business opportunity

        is most assuredly not

        the holder of any of the positions for which he made

 application at the employmentagency






                                                                                  3*

947
                                 CHARLEY ANDERSON


    The train was three hours late getting into St. Paul,
Charley had his coat on and his bag closed an hour before
he got in. He sat fidgeting in the seat taking off and pull-
ing on a pair of new buckskin gloves. He wished they
wouldn^t all be down at the station to meet him. Maybe
only Jim would be there. Maybe they hadn’t got his wire.
    The porter came and brushed him off, then took his
bags. Charley couldn’t see much through the driving steam
and snow outside the window. The train slackened speed,
stopped in a broad snowswept freightyard, started again
with a jerk and a series of snorts from the forced draft in
the engine. The bumpers slammed all down the train.
Charley’s hands were icy inside his gloves. The porter
stuck his head in and yelled, ^"St. Paul.’^ There was noth-
ing to do but get out.
    There they all were. Old man Vogel and Aunt Hart-
mann with their red faces and their long noses looked just
the same as ever, but Jim and Hedwig had both of them
filled out. Hedwig had on a mink coat and Jim’s overcoat
looked darn prosperous. Jim snatched Charley’s bags away
from him and Hedwig and Aunt Hartmann kissed him
and old man Vogel thumped him on the back. They all
talked at once and asked him all kinds of questions. When
he asked about Ma, Jim frowned and said she was in the
hospital, they’d go around to see her this afternoon. They
piled the bags into a new Ford sedan and squeezed them-
selves in after with a lot of giggling and squealing from
Aunt Hartmann. ^^You see I got the Ford agency now,”
said Jim. ^^To tell the truth, things have been pretty good
out here.” ^Wait till you see the house, it’s all been done
over,” said Hedwig. ‘Well, my poy made de Cherman
Kaiser run. Speaking for the Cherman-American com-
moonity of the Twin Cities, ve are pProud of you.”

         32

948
   They had a big dinner ready and Jim gave him a drink
of whiskey and old man Vogel kept pouring him out beer
and saying, “Now tell us all about it.” Charley sat there
his face all red, eating the stewed chicken and the dump-
lings and drinking the beer till he was ready to burst. He
coiddn^t think what to tell them so he made funny cracks
when they asked him questions. After dinner old man
Vogel gave him one of his best Havana cigars.
    That afternoon Charley and Jim went to the hospital
to see Ma. Driving over, Jim said sheM been operated
on for a tumor but that he was afraid it was cancer, but
even that hadn^t given Charley an idea of how sick she’d
be. Her face was shrunken and yellow against the white
pillow. When he leaned over to kiss her her lips felt thm
and hot. Her breath was very bad. “Charley, Pm glad you
came,” she said in a trembly voice. “It would have been
better if you’d come sooner. ... Not that I’m not com-
fortable here .    .  . anyway I’ll be glad having my boys
around me when I get well. God has watched over us all,
Charley, we mustn’t forget Him.” “Now, Ma, we don’t
want to get tired and excited,” said Jim. “We want to
keep our strength to get well.”
    “Oh, but He’s been so merciful,” She brought her small
 hand, so thin it was blue, out from under the cover and
 dabbed at her eyes with a handkerchief. ^^Jim, hand me my
 glasses, that’s a good boy,” she said in a stronger voice.
 “Let me take a look at the prodigal son.”
     Charley couldn’t help shuffling his feet uneasily as she
 looked at him.
     “You’re quite a man now and you’ve made quite a name
 for yourself over there. You boys have turned out better
 than I hoped.   . . . Charley, I was afraid you’d turn out a
 bum like your old man.” They all laughed. They didn’t
 know what to say.
     She took her glasses off again and tried to reach for the
 bedside table with them. The glasses dropped out of her

                                                                                  33

949
hand and broke on the concrete floor.            . . . my . . ,
never mind, I don^t need ’em much here.”
    Charley picked the pieces up and put them carefully
in his vest pocket. ^^I’ll get ’em fixed, Ma.”
    The nurse was standing in the door beckoning with her
head. “Well, goodby, see you tomorrow,” they said.
    Once they were out in the corridor Charley felt that
tears were running down his face.
    “That’s how it is,” said Jim, frowning. “They keep her
tinder dope most of the time. I thought she’d be more
comfortable m a private room, but they sure do know how
to charge in these damn hospitals.” “I’ll chip m on it,” said
Charley. “I got a little money saved up.” “Well, I sup-
pose It’s no more than right you should,” Jim said.
    Charley took a deep breath of the cold afternoon when
they paused on the hospital steps, but he couldn’t get the
smell of ether and drugs and sickness out of his head. It
had come on fine with an icy wind. The snow on the streets
and roofs was bright pink from the flaring sunset.
    “We’ll go down to the shop and see what’s what,” said
Jim. “I told the guy works for me to call up some of the
newspaperboys. I thought it would be a little free adver-
tising if they came down to the salesroom to interview
you.” Jim slapped Charley on the back. “They eat up this
returnedhero stuff. String ’em along a little, won’t you?”
    Charley didn’t answer.
    “Jesus Christ, Jim, I don’t know what to tell ’em,” he
said in a low voice when they got back m the car Jim was
pressing his foot on the selfstarter. “What do you think of
cornin’ in the business, Charley? It’s gettin’ to be a good
un, I can tell you that.” “That’s nice of you, Jim. Suppose
1 kinder think about it.”
    When they got back to the house, they went around to
the new salesroom Jim had built out from the garage, that
had been a liverystable m the old days, back of old man
Vogel’s house. The salesroom had a big plateglass window

         34

950
with Ford slanting across it in blue letters. Inside stood
a new truck all shining and polished. Then there was a
green carpet and a veneered mahogany desk and a tele-
phone that pulled out on a nickel accordion bracket and an
artificial palm in a fancy jardiniere in the corner. ^^Take
your weight off your feet, Charley,” said Jim, pointing to
the swivelchair and bringing out a box of cigars. ^^Lefis sit
around and chew the rag a little.”
    Charley sat down and picked himself out a cigar. Jim
stood against the radiator with his thumbs in the armholes
of his vest. “What do you think of it, kid, pretty keen,
am^t it?”
    “Pretty keen, Jim.” They lit their cigars and scuffled
around with their feet a little.
    Jim began again: “But it won’t do. I got to get me a
big new place downtown. This used to be central. Now it’s
out to hell and gone.”
    Charley kinder grunted and puffed on his cigar. Jim
took a couple of steps back and forth, looking at Charley
all the time. “With your connections in the Legion and
aviation and all that kinder stuff, we’ll be jake. Every
other Ford dealer in the district’s got a German name.”
    “Jim, can that stuff. I can’t talk to newspapermen,”
    Jim flushed and frowned and sat down on the edge of
the desk. “But you got to hold up your end.        .  .  . What
do you think I’m taking you in on it for? I’m not doin’ it
for my kid brother’s pretty blue eyes.”
    Charley got to his feet. “Jim, I ain’t goin’ in on it. I’m
already signed up with an aviation proposition with my
old C.O.”
    “Twentyfive years from now you can talk to me about
aviation. Ain’t practical yet.”
    “Well, we got a couple of tricks up our sleeve.           . . *
We’re shootin’ the moon.”
    “That’s about the size of it.” Jim got to his feet. His lips
got thin. “Well, you needn’t think you can lay around my

                                                                                 3S

951
house all winter just because you^re a war hero. I£ that^s
your idea youVe got another think comin\” Charley burst
out laughing. Jim came up and put his hand wheedlingly
on Charley’s shoulder. “Say, those birds’ll be around here
in a fev/ minutes. You be a good feller and change into
your uniform and put on all the medals.      .  .  . Give us a
break.”
    Charley stood a minute staring at the ash on his cigar.
^^How about givin’ me a break? Haven’t been in the house
five hours and there you go pickin’ on me just like when
I was workin’ back here.  .  . .”

    Jim was losing control of himself, he was starting to
shake. ^Well, you know what you can do about that,” he
said, cutting his words off sharp. Charley felt like smash-
ing him one in his damn narrow jaw. “If it wasn’t for Ma,
you wouldn’t need to worry about that,” he said quietly.
    Jim didn’t answer for a minute. The wrinkles came out
of his forehead. He shook his head and looked grave.
“You’re right, Charley, you better stick around. If it gives
her any pleasure .   . .”

    Charley threw his cigar halfsmoked into the brass spit-
toon and walked out the door before Jim could stop him.
He went to the house and got his hat and coat and went
for a long walk through the soggy snow of the grey after-
noon.
    They were j'ust finishing at the suppertable when Char-
ley got back. His supper had been set out on a plate for
him at his place. Nobody spoke but old man Vogel. “Ve
been tinking, dese airmen maybe dey live on air too,” he
said and laughed wheezily. Nobody else laughed. Jim got
up and went out of the room. As soon as Charley had swal-
lowed his supper he said he was sleepy and went up to bed.
    Charley stayed on while November dragged on towards
Thanksgiving and Christmas. His mother never seemed to
be any better. Every afternoon he went over to see her for
five or ten minutes. She was always cheerful. It made him
         0$

952
feel terrible the way she talked about the goodness of God
and how she was going to get better. He’d try to get her
talking about Fargo and old Lizzie and the old days in the
boardinghouse, but she didn’t seem to remember much
about that, except about sermons she’d heard in church.
He’d leave the hospital feeling weak and groggy. The rest
of his time he spent looking up books on internalcombus-
tion motors at the public library, or did odd jobs for Jim
in the garage the way he used to when he was a kid.
    One evening after Newyears’ Charley went over to the
Elks Ball in Minneapolis with a couple of fellows he
knew. The big hall was full of noise and paper lanterns.
He was cruising around threading his way between groups
of people waiting for the next dance when he found him-
self looking into a thin face and blue eyes he knew. It was
too late to make out he hadn’t seen her. ^^Hello, Emiscah,”
he said, keeping his voice as casual as he could.
    “Charley .    .  . my God ” He was afraid for a minute
that she was going to faint. “Let’s dance,” he said.
    She felt limp in his arms. They danced a while without
saying anything. She had too much rouge on her cheeks
and he didn’t like the perfume she had on. After the dance
they sat in a corner and talked. She wasn’t married yet.
She worked in a departmentstore. No, she didn’t live at
home any more, she lived in a flat with a girlfriend. He
must come up. It would be like old times. He must give
her his phonenumber. She supposed things seemed pretty
tame to him now after all those French girls. And imagine
him getting a commission, the Andersons sure were going
up in the world, she guessed they’d be forgetting their old

 friends. Emiscah’s voice had gotten screechy and she had
 a way he didn’t like of putting her hand on his knee.
    As soon as he could Charley said he had a headache and
 had to go home. He wouldn’t wait for the guys he’d come
 with. The evening was ruined for him anyway, he was
 thinking. He rode back all alone on the interurban trolley.

                                                                                  37

953
it was cold as blazes. It was about time he got the hell oun!
of this dump. He really did have a splitting headache and
chills.
    Next morning he was down with the flu and had to stay
in bed. It was almost a relief. Hedwig brought him stacks
of detective stories and Aunt Hartmann fussed over him
and brought him toddies and eggflips, and ail he had to do
was lie there and read.
    First thing he did when he got on his feet was to go over
to the hospital. Ma had had another operation and hadn^t
come out of it very well. The room was darkened and she
didn^t remember when sheM seen him last. She seemed to
think she was home in Fargo and that he’d just come back
from his tnp south. She held tight to his hand and kept
saying, ^‘My son that was lost hath been returned to me

. .   , thank God for my boy.” It took the strength out of
him so he had to sit down for a second in a wicker chair
in the corridor when he left her.
    A nurse came up to him and stood beside him fidgeting
with a paper and pencil. He looked up at her, she had
pink cheeks and pretty dark eyelashes. “You mustn’t let it
get you,” she said. He grinned. “Oh, I’m all right. . .             .
I just got out of bed from a touch of flu, it sure pulls down
your strength.”
    “I hear you were an aviator,” she said. “I had a brother
in the Royal Flying Corps. We’re Canadians.”
    “Those were great boys,” said Charley. He wondered
if he could date her up but then he thought of Ma. “Tell
me honestly what you think, please do.”
    ^Well, it’s against the rules, but judging from other
^ses I’ve seen her chances are not very good.”
    “I thought so.”
    He got to his feet. “You’re a peach, do you know it?”
Her face got red from the starched cap to the white collar
t>f her uniform. She wrinkled up her forehead and her
voice got very chilly. “In a rase like that it’s better to have
         38

954
it happen quickly.” Charley felt a lump rise in his throat*
^^Oh, I know.” “Well, goodby, Lieutenant, Pve got to ga
about my business.” “Gee, thanks a lot,” said Charley.
When he got out in the air he kept remembering hei
pretty face and her nice lips.
    One slushy morning of thaw in early March Charley
was taking a scorched gasket out of a Buick when the
garage helper came and said they wanted him on the phone
from the hospital. A cold voice said Mrs. Anderson was
sinking fast and the family better be notified. Charley
got out of his overalls and went to call Hedwig. Jim
was out, so they took one of the cars out of the garage.
Charley had forgotten to wash his hands and they were
black with grease and carbon. Hedwig found him a rag to
wipe them off with. “Someday, Hedwig,” he said, “Pra
going to get me a clean job in a draftin^room.”
    “Well, Jim wanted you to be his salesman,” Hedwig
snapped crossly. “I don’t see how you’re going to get any-
wheres if you turn down every opportunity.” “Well,,
maybe there’s opportunities I won’t turn down.” “I’d like
to know where you’re going to get ’em except with us,” she
said. Charley didn’t answer. Neither of them said any-
thing more in the long drive across town. When they got
to the hospital they found that Ma had sunk into a coma.
Two days later she died.
    At the funeral, about halfway through the service^
Charley felt the tears coming. He went out and locked
himself in the toilet at the garage and sat down on the
seat and cried like a child. When they came back from the
cemetery he was in a black mood and wouldn’t let any-
body speak to him. After supper, when he found Jim and
 Hedwig sitting at the diningroom table figuring out with
 pencil and paper how much it had cost them, he blew up
 and said he’d pay every damn cent of it and they wouldn’t
 have to worry about his staying around the goddam house
 either. He went out slamming the door after him and ran

                                                                                  39

955
upstairs and threw himself on his bed. He lay there a long
time in his uniform without undressing, staring at the ceil-
ing and hearing mealy voices saying, deceased, bereave-
ment, hereafter.
    The day after the funeral Emiscah called up. She said
she was so sorry about his mother’s death and wouldn’t he
come around to see her some evening? Before he knew
what he was doing he’d said he’d come. He felt blue and
lonely and he had to talk to somebody besides Jim and
Hedwig. That evening he drove over to see her. She was
alone. He didn’t like the cheap gimcracky look her apart-
ment had. He took her out to the movies and she said did
he remember the time they went to see The Birth of a
Nation together. He said he didn’t, though he remem-
bered all right. He could see that she wanted to start
things up with him again.
    Driving back to her place she let her head drop on his
shoulder. When he stopped the car in front of where she
lived, he looked down and saw that she was crying.
‘^Charley, won’t you give me a little kiss for old times?”
she whispered. He kissed her. When she said would he
come up, he stammered that he had to be home early. She
kept saying, “Oh, come ahead. I won’t eat you, Charley,”
and finally he went up with her though it was the last
thing he’d intended to do.
    She made them cocoa on her gasburner and told him
how unhappy she was, it was so tiring being on your feet
all day behind the counter and the women who came to
buy things were so mean to you, and the floorwalkers were
alwa3"s pinching your seat and expecting you to cuddle-
cooty with them in the fittingbooths. Some day she was
going to turn on the gas. It made Charley feel bad having
her talk like that and he had to pet her a little to make her
stop crying. Then he got hot and had to make love to her.
When he left he promised to call her up next week.
     Next morning he got a letter that she must have written
         40

956
right after he left saying that sheM never loved anybody
but him. That night after supper he tried to write her that
he didn’t want to marry anybody and least of all her; he
couldn’t get it worded right, so he didn’t write at all.
When she called up next day he said he was very busy
and that he’d have to go up into North Dakota to see about
some property his mother had left. He didn’t like the way
she said, ^^Of course I understand. I’ll call you up when
you get back, dear.”
    Hedwig began to ask who that woman was who was
calling him up all the time, and Jim said, ^^Look out for
the women, Charley. If they think you’ve got anything
they’ll hold onto you like a leech.” ^^Yessir,” said old man
Vogel, “it’s not like ven you’re in the army yet and can
say goodby, mein schatz, I’m off to the vars, now they can
find out vere you live.” “You needn’t worry,” growled
Charley. “I won’t stay put.”
    The day they went over to the lawyer’s office to read
Ma’s will, Jim and Hedwig dressed up fit to kill. It made
Charley sore to see them, Hedwig in a new black tailored
dress with a little lace at the throat and Jim dressed up like
an undertaker in the suit he’d bought for the funeral. The
lawyer was a small elderly German Jew with white hair
brushed carefully over the big baldspot on the top of his
head and goldrimmed pincenez on his thin nose. He was
waiting for them when they came into the office. He got up
smiling solemnly behind his desk littered with bluebound
 documents and made a little bow. Then he sat down beam-
 ing at them with his elbows among the papers, gently
 rubbing the tips of his fingers together. Nobody spoke for
 a moment. Jim coughed behind his hand like in church.
 “Now let me see,” said Mr. Goldberg in a gentlesweet
 voice with a slight accent like an actor’s. “Oughtn’t there
 to be more of you?”
     Jim spoke up. “Esther and Ruth couldn’t come. They
 both live on the coast. . . . I’ve got their power of attor-

                                                                                  41

957
neys. Ruth had her husband sign hers too, in case there
might be any realestate.” Mr. Goldberg made a little
clucking noise with his tongue. ‘^‘“Too bad. T^d rather have
all parties present.  .  .  . But in this case there will be no
difficultyj I trust. Mr. James A. Anderson is named sole
executor. Of course you understand that in a case like this
the aim of all parties is to avoid taking the will to probate.
That saves trouble and expense. There is no need of it
when one of the legatees is named executor. »  .  . I shall
proceed to read the will.”
    Mr. Goldberg must have drafted it himself because he
sure seemed to enjoy reading it. Except for a legacy of
one thousand dollars to Lizzie Green who had run Ma’s
boardinghouse up in Fargo, all the estate, real and per*
^onal, the lots in Fargo, the Liberty bonds and the fifteen-
hundreddollar savingsaccount were left to the children
jointly to be administered by James A. Anderson, sole
executor, and eventually divided as they should agree
among themselves.
    ^^Now are there any questions and suggestions?” asked
Mr. Goldberg genially.
    Charley couldn^t help seeing that Jim felt pretty good
about it. ^Tt has been suggested,” went on Mr. Goldberg’s
even voice that melted blandly among the documents like
butter on a hot biscuit, ^^that Mr, Charles Anderson, who
I understand is leaving soon for the East, would be willing
to sign a power of attorney similar to those signed by his
sisters. .  . . The understanding is that the money will be
invested in a mortgage on the Anderson Motor Sales Co.”
    Charley felt himself go cold all over. Jim and Hedwig
were looking at him anxiously.            don’t understand the
legal talk,” he said, ^^but what I want to do is get mine
as soon as possible. ... I have a proposition in the East
 I want to put some money in.”
     Jim’s thin lower lip began to tremble. You’d better
         42

958
not be a damn fool, Charley. I know more about business
than you do.”
   ^^About your business maybe, but not about mine.”
    Hedwig, who’d been looking at Charley like she could
kill him, began to butt in: ^^Now, Charley, you let Jim dO'
what he thinks best. He just wants to do what’s best for all
of us.”
    ^^Aw, shut your face,” said Charley.
    Jim jumped to his feet. ^^Look here, kid, you can^t talk:
to my wife in that tone of voice.”
    “My friends, my dear friends,” the lawyer crooned,
rubbing his fingers together till it looked like they’d
smoke, “we mustn’t let ourselves be carried away, must
we, not on a solemn occasion like this. . . . What we
want is a quiet fireside chat . . . the friendly atmosphere
of the home. .    .
    Charley let out a snorting laugh. “That’s what it’s
always been like in my home,” he said halfaloud and
turned his back on them to look out of the window over
white roofs and iciclehung fireescapes. The snow, thawing
on the shingle roof of a frame house next door, was steam-
ing in the early afternoon sun. Beyond it he could see
backlots deep in drifts and a piece of clean asphalt street
 where cars shuttled back and forth.
    “Look here, Chaxley, snap out of it.” Jim’s voice behind
 him took on a pleading singsong tone. “You know the
 proposition Ford has put up to his dealers.    . . . It’s sink
 or swim for me. .    .  . But as an investment it’s the chance
 of a lifetime. . .       . The cars are there. ... You can’t

 lose, even if the company folds up.”
     Charley turned around. “Jim,” he said mildly, “I don’t
 want to argue about it, ... 1 want to get my share of
 what Ma left in cash as soon as you and Mr. Goldberg
 can fix it up. ... I got somethin’ about airplane motors

 that’ll make any old Ford agency look like thirty cents.’^
     “But I want to pul Ma’s money in on a sure thing. The

                                                                                  43

959
Ford car is the safest investment in the world, isn’t that

so, Mr. Goldberg!^”
    “You certainly see them everywhere. Perhaps the young
man would wait and think things over a little. ... I can
make the preliminary steps .   . .”

    “Preliminary nothing. I want to get what I can out
right now. If you can’t do it I’ll go and get another lawyer
who will.”
    Charley picked up his hat and coat and walked out.
    Next morning Charley turned up at breakfast in his
overalls as usual. Jim told him he didn’t want him doing
any work in his business, seeing the way he felt about it.
Charley went back upstairs to his room and lay down on
the bed. When Hedwig came in to make it up she said,
“Oh, are you still here^” and went out slamming the door
after her. He could hear her slamming and banging things
around the house as she and Aunt Hartmann did the
housework.
    About the middle of the morning Charley went down
to where Jim sat worrying over his books at the desk in the
office. “Jim, I want to talk to you.” Jim took off his glasses
and looked up at him. “Well, what’s on your mind?”’ he
asked, cutting off his words the way he had. Charley said
he’d sign a power of attorney for Jim if he’d lend him five
hundred dollars right away. Then maybe later if the air-
plane proposition looked good he’d let Jim in on it. Jim
made a sour face at that. “All right,” said Charley. “Make
It four hundred. I got to get out of this dump.”
    Jim rose to his feet slowly. He was so pale Charley
thought he must be sick. “Well, if you can’t get it into
your head what I’m up against    . . . you can’t and to hell
 with you. .   . . All right, you and me are through. . . .
 Hedwig will have to borrow it at the bank in her name.

 . . I’m up to my neck.”
    “Fix it any way you like,” said Charley. “I got to get
 ’sut of here.”

960
   It was lucky the phone rang when it did or Charley and
Jim would have taken a poke at each other. Charley an-
swered it. It was Emiscah. She said she’d been over in

St. Paul and had seen him on the street yesterday and that
he’d just said he was going to be out of town to give her
the air, and he had to come over tonight or she didn’t
know what she’d do, he wouldn’t want her to kill herself,
would he*^ He got all balled up, what with rowing with
Jim and everything and ended by telling her he’d come.
By the time he was through talking Jim had walked into
the salesroom and was chinning with a customer, all smiles.
    Going over on the trolley he decided he’d tell her he’d
got married to a French girl during the war but when he
got up to her flat he didn’t know what to say, she looked
so thin and pale. He took her out to a dancehall. It made
him feel bad how happy she acted, as if everything was
fixed up again between them. When he left her he made
a date for the next week.
    Before that day came he was oiff for Chi. He didn’t be-
gin to feel really good until he’d transferred across town
and was on the New York tram. He had a letter in his
pocket from Joe Askew telling him Joe would be in town
to meet him. He had what was left of the three hundred
 berries Hedwig coughed up after deducting his board and
lodging all winter at ten dollars a week. But on the New
York train he stopped thinking about all that and about
Emiscah and the mean time he’d had and let himself think
about New York and airplane motors and Dons Hum-
phries.
    When he woke up in the morning in the lower berth he
 pushed up the shade and looked out; the train was going
 through the Pennsylvania hills, the fields were fresh-
 plowed, some of the trees had a little fuzz of green on
 them. In a farmyard a flock of yellow chickens were pick-
 ing around under a peartree in bloom. ^^By God,” he said
 aloud, ^^I’m through with the sticks.”

                                                                                  45

961
                                               NEWSREEL XLVIII



        truly the Steel Corporation stands forth as a corporate

 ^olossus both physically and financially

             Now the jolks m Georgia they done gone ‘wild
             Over that brand new dancm^ style
                                   Called        Shake         That          Thing

                              CARBARNS BLAZE

GYPSY ARRESTED FOR TELLING THE TRUTH

                        Horsewhipping Hastens Wedding

         that strength has long since become almost a truism as

steel’s expanding career progressed, yet the dimensions thereof
need at times to be freshly measured to be caught m proper
perspective

          DAZED BY MAINE DEMOCRATS CRY FOR MONEY

                                                            shake that thing

           Woman of Mystery Tries Suicide in Park Lake

        shake that thing

      OLIVE THOMAS DEAD FROM POISON

                 LETTER SAID GET OUT OF WALL STREET

                    BOMB WAGON TRACED TO JERSEY

                                                     Shake That Thing

                            Writer of Warnings Arrives

                      BODY FOUND LASHED TO BICYCLE

                     FIND BOMB CLOCKWORK

962
                                                                                            ,



                                                              TIN LIZZIE


        ^^Mr, Ford the automohileer the featurewriter
wrote in 190O5
        ^^NLr, Ford the automobileer began by giving his
steed three or four sharf 'jerks with the lever at the
righthand side of the seat; that Uy he fulled the lever
uf and down sharfly in ordery as he sa^dy to mix atr
with gasoline and drive the charge into the exflod-^
ing cyhnder,     , .   . Mr, Ford sliffed a small electric
switch handle and there followed a puffy puffy puff,

, ,   . The puffing of the machine assumed a higher key
She was flying along about eight miles an hour. The
ruts in the road were deepy hut the machine certamly
went with a dreamlike smoothness, There was none of
the bumping common even to a streetcar, ,,, By this
time the boulevard had been reachedy and the automo-
bdeery letting a lever fall a Utthy let her out, Whi% ^

She picked up speed with infinite rapidity. As she ran
 on there was a clattering behindy the new noise of the
automobile.
         For twenty years or more,
         ever since he’d left his father’s farm when he was

 sixteen to get a job in a Detroit machineshop, Henry
 Ford had been nuts about machinery. First it was
 watches, then he designed a steamtractor, then he built

 a horseless carriage with an engine adapted from the
 Otto gasengine he’d read about in The World of
 Sciencey then a mechanical buggy with a onecylinder

 fourcycle motor, that would run forward but not backj

         at last, in ninetyeight, he felt he was far enough

 along to risk throwing up his job with the Detroit Edi-

 son Company, where he’d worked his way up from

 night fireman to chief engineer, to put all his time into

 working on a new gasoline engine,
                                                                                  47

963
         (in the late eighties he’d met Edison at a meeting
of electriclight employees in Atlantic City. He’d gone
up to Edison after Edison had delivered an address
and asked him if he thought gasoline was practical as
a motor fuel. Edison had said yes. If Edison said it, it
was true. Edison was the great admiration of Henry
Ford’s life) j
        and in driving his mechanical buggy, sitting there
at the lever jauntily dressed in a tightbuttoned jacket
and a high collar and a derby hat, back and forth over
the level illpaved streets of Detroit,
        scaring the big brewery horses and the skinny
trotting horses and the sleekrumped pacers with the
motor’s loud explosions,
         looking for men scatterbrained enough to invest
money in a factory for building automobiles.
         He was the eldest son of an Irish immigrant who
during the Civil War had married the daughter of a
prosperous Pennsylvania Dutch farmer and settled
down to farming near Dearborn in Wayne County,
Michigan j
         like plenty of other Americans, young Henry
grew up hating the endless sogging through the mud
about the chores, the hauling and pitching manure, the
kerosene lamps to clean, the irk and sweat and solitude
of the farm.


         He Was a slender, active youngster, a good skater,
                                         what he liked was to tend the
 clever with his hands 3
 machinery and let the others do the heavy work. His
 mother had told him not to drink, smoke, gamble or go
 into debt, and he never did.
         When he was in his early twenties his father tried
 to get him back from Detroit, where he was working
 as mechanic and repairman for the Drydock Engine
         48

964
Company that built engines for steamboats, by giving
him forty acres of land.
        Young Henry built himself an uptodate square
white dwellinghouse with a false mansard roof and
married and settled down on the farm,
        but he let the hired men do the farming j
        he bought himself a buzzsaw and rented a sta-
tionary engine and cut the timber off the woodlots.
        He was a thrifty young man who never drank or
smoked or gambled or coveted his neighbor’s wife, but
he couldn’t stand living on the farm.
        He moved to Detroit, and in the brick barn be-
hind his house tinkered for years in his spare time with
a mechanical buggy that would be light enough to
run over the clayey wagonroads of Wayne County,
Michigan.
         By 1900 he had a practicable car to promote.


         He was forty years old before the Ford Motor
Company was started and production began to move.
         Speed was the first thing the early automobile
manufacturers went after. Races advertised the makes
of cars.
         Henry Ford himself hung up several records at
the track at Grosse Pointe and on the ice on Lake St.
Clair. In his 999 he did the mile in thirtynine and
fourfifths seconds.
         But it had always been his custom to hire others to
do the heavy work. The speed he was busy with was
speed in production, the records records in efficient
output. He hired Barney Oldfield, a stunt bicyclerider
from Salt Lake City, to do the racing for him.




                                                                                  49

965
       Henry Ford had ideas about other things than
the designing of motors, carburetors, magnetos, jigs and
                                         he had ideas about sales,
fixtures, punches and dies ;
       that the big money was in economical quantity
production, quick turnover, cheap interchangeable
easilyreplaced standardized parts 5
       ’t wasn’t until 1909, after years of arguing with
his partners, that Ford put out the first Model T.


        Henry Ford was right.
        That season he sold more than ten thousand tin
lizzies, ten years later he was selling almost a million
a year.
        In these years the Taylor Plan was stirring up
plantmanagers and manufacturers all over the coun-
try. Efficiency was the word. The same ingenuity that
went into improving the performance of a machine
could go into improving the performance of the work-
men producing the machine.
        In 1913 they established the assemblyline at
Ford’s. That season the profits were something like
twentyfive million dollars, but they had trouble in
keeping the men on the job, machinists didn’t seem to
like it at Ford’s.


        Heni-y Ford had ideas about other things than
production.
        He was the largest automobile manufacturer in
                                                      maybe it the steady
the world, he paid high wages j
workers thought they were getting a cut (a very small
 cut) in the profits, it would give trained men an in-
 ducement to stick to their jobs,
        wellpaid workers might save enough money to
                             the first day Ford’s announced that
 buy a tin lizzie 5

966
cleancut properlymarried American workers who
wanted jobs had a chance to make five bucks a day
(of course it turned out that there were strings to it;
always there were strings to it)
        such an enormous crowd waited outside the High-
land Park plant
        all through the zero January night
        that there was a riot when the gates were opened.;
cops broke heads, jobhunters threw bricks; properf'v,
Henry Ford’s own property, was destroyed. The com-
pany dicks had to turn on the firehose to beat back the
crowd.


        The American Plan; automotive prosperity seep-
ing down from above; it turned out there were strings
to it.
        But that five dollars a day
        paid to good, clean American workmen
        who didn’t drink or smpke cigarettes or read or
think,
         and who didn’t commit adultery
         and whose wives didn’t take in boarders,
        made America once more the Yukon of the
sweated workers of the world;
         made all the tin lizzies and the automotive age,
and incidentally,
         made Henry Ford the automobileer, the admirer
of Edison, the birdlover,
         the great American of his time.



         But Henry Ford had ideas about other things
besides assemblylines and the livinghabits of his em-
ployees. He was full of ideas. Instead of going to the

city to make his fortune, here was a country boy who’d

967
                                                                      y



made his fortune by bringing the city out to the farm,
The precepts he’d learned out of McGuffey’s Reader,
his mother’s prejudices and preconceptions, he had pre-
served clean and unworn as freshprinted bills in the
safe in a bank.
        He wanted people to know about his ideas, so he
bought the Dearborn Independent and started a cam-
paign against cigarettesmoking.
        When war broke out in Europe, he had ideas
about that too. (Suspicion of armymen and soldiering
were part of the midwest farm tradition, like thrift,
stickativeness, temperance and sharp practice in money
matters.) Any intelligent American mechanic could see
that if the Europeans hadn’t been a lot of ignorant
underpaid foreigners who drank, smoked, were loose
about women and wasteful in their methods of produc-
tion, the war could never have happened.
        When Rosika Schwimmer broke through the
stockade of secretaries and servicemen who surrounded
Henry Ford and suggested to him that he could stop
tire war,
        he said sure they’d hire a ship and go over and get
the boys out of the trenches by Christmas.


        He hired a steamboat, the Oscar II and filled it
up with pacifists and socialworkers,
        to go over to explain to the princelings of Europe
        that what they were doing was vicious and silly.
         It wasn’t his fault that Poor Richard’s common-
sense no longer rules the world and that most of the
pacifists were nuts,
        goofy with headlines.
        When William Jennings Bryan went over to Ho-
boken to see him off, somebody handed William Jen-
nings Bryan a squirrel in a cagej William Jennings
         52

968
Bryan made a speech with the squirrel under his arm,
Henry Ford threw American Beauty roses to the crowd.
The band played I Didn't Raise My Boy to Be a Sol-
dier. Practical jokers let loose more squirrels. Am
eloping couple was married by a platoon o£ ministers in
the saloon, and Mr. Zero, the flophouse humanitarian,
who reached the dock too late to sail,
        dove into the North River and swam after the boat.
        The Oscar II was described as a floating Chautau-
qua} Henry Ford said it felt like a middlewestern vil-
lage, but by the time they reached Christiansand in
Norway, the reporters had kidded him so that he had
gotten cold feet and gone to bed. The world was too
crazy outside of Wayne County, Michigan. Mrs. Ford
and the management sent an Episcopal dean after him
who brought him home under wraps,
         and the pacifists had to speechify without him.


         Two years later Ford’s was manufacturing muni-
tions, Eagle boats} Henry Ford was planning oneman
tanks, and oneman submarines like the one tried out in
the Revolutionary War. He announced to the press
that he’d turn over his war profits to the government,
         but there’s no record that he ever did.



         One thing he brought back from his trip
         was the Protocols of the Elders of Zion.
         He started a campaign to enlighten the world in
the Dearborn Independent, the Jews were why the
world wasn’t like Wayne County, Michigan, in the
old horse and buggy days;
         the Jews had started the war, Bolshevism, Dar-
winism, Marxism, Nietzsche, short skirts and lipstick.

                                                                                  53

969
They were behind Wall Street and the international
bankers, and the whiteslave traffic and the movies and
the Supreme Court and ragtime and the illegal liquor
business.
        Henry Ford denounced the Jews and ran for sen-
ator and sued the Chicago Tribune for libel,
        and was the laughingstock of the kept metropolitan
press \
        but when the metropolitan bankers tried to horn
in on his business
        he thoroughly outsmarted them.



        In 1918 he had borrowed on notes to buy out his
minority stockholders for the picayune sum of seventy-
five million dollars.
        In February, 1920, he needed cash to pay off some
of these notes that were coming due. A banker is sup-
posed to have called on him and offered him every
facility if the bankers’ representative could be made a
member of the board of directors. Henry Ford handed
the banker his hat,
        and went about raising the money in his own way:
        he shipped every car and part he had in his plant
to his dealers and demanded immediate cash payment.
Let the other fellow do the borrowing had always been
a cardinal principle. He shut down production and can-
celed all orders from the supplyfirms. Many dealers
were ruined, many supplyfirms failed, but when he re-
opened his plant,
        he owned it absolutely,
        the way a man owns an unmortgaged farm with
the taxes paid up.
        In 1922 there started the Ford boom for President
(high wages, waterpower, industry scattered to the

        54

970
small towns) that was skillfully pricked behind the
scenes
        by another crackerbarrel philosopher,
        Calvin Coolidgej
        but in 1922 Henry Ford sold one million three
hundred and thirtytwo thousand two hundred and nine
                   he was the richest man in the world.
tin lizzies 5
        Good roads had followed the narrow ruts made in
the mud by the Model T. The great automotive boom
was on. At Ford’s production was improving all the
            less waste, more spotters, strawbosses, stool-
time 5
pigeons (fifteen minutes for lunch, three minutes to
go to the toilet, the Taylorized speedup everywhere,
reach under, adjust washer, screw down bolt, shove
in cotterpin, reachunder adjustwasher, screwdown
bolt, reachunderadjustscrewdownreachunderadjust until
every ounce of life was sucked off into production and
at night the workmen went home grey shaking husks),
        Ford owned every detail of the process from the
ore in the hills until the car rolled off the end of the
assemblyline under its own power, the plants were
rationalized to the last tenthousandth of an inch as
measured by the Johansen scale;
        in 1926 the production cycle was reduced to
eightyone hours from the ore in the mine to the fin-
ished salable car proceeding under its own power,
        but the Model T was obsolete.


         New Era prosperity and the American Plan
         (there were strings to it, always there were strings

to it)
         had killed Tin Lizzie.
         Ford’s was just one of many automobile plants.



                                                                                 55

971
        When the stockmarket bubble bursty
        Mr. Ford the crackerbarrel philosopher said jubi-
lantly,
              told you so.
        Serves you right for gambling and getting in debt.
        The country is sound.”
        But when the country on cracked shoes, m frayed
trousers, belts tightened over hollow bellies,
        idle hands cracked and chapped with the cold of
that coldest March day of 1932,
        started marching from Detroit to Dearborn, ask-
ing for work and the American Plan, all they could
think of at Ford^s was machineguns.
        The country was sound, but they mowed the
marchers down.
        They shot four of them dead.



        Henry Ford as an old man

        is a passionate antiquarian,
         (lives besieged on his father’s farm embedded in
an estate of thousands of millionaire acres, protected by
an army of servicemen, secretaries, secret agents, dicks
runder orders of an English exprizefighter,
        always afraid of the feet in broken shoes on the
roads, afraid the gangs will kidnap his grandchildren,
        that a crank will shoot him,
        that Change and the idle hands out of work will
break through the gates and the high fences j
        protected by a private army against
        the new America of starved children and hollow
bellies and cracked shoes stamping on souplines,
        that has swallowed up the old thrifty farmlands
         of Wayne County, Michigan,
        as if they had never been).

972
        Henry Ford as an old man
        is a passionate antiquarian.
        He rebuilt his father’s farmhouse and put it back
exactly in the state he remembered it m as a boy He
built a village of museums for buggies, sleighs, coaches,
old plows, waterwheels, obsolete models of motorcars.
He scoured the country for fiddlers to play old-
fashioned squaredances.
        Even old taverns he bought and put back into
their original shape, as well as Thomas Edison’s early
laboratories.
        When he bought the Wayside Inn near Sudbury,
Massachusetts, he had the new highway where the
newmodel cars roared and slithered and hissed oilily
past {the new noise of the automobile') y
        moved away from the door,
        put back the old bad road,
        so that everything might be
        the way it used to be,
        in the days of horses and buggies.



                                               NEWSREEL XLIX


                  Jack o’ Dtamonds Jack o’ Diamonds
                      You rob my pocket of stiver and gold

              WITNESSES OF MYSTERY IN SLUSH PROBE

             Philadelphian Beaten to Death in His Room

        the men who the workers had been told a short }ear be-

fore were fighting their battle for democracy upon the blood-

stained fields of France and whom they had been urged to

support by giving the last of their strength to the work of pro-

duction—these men were coming to teach them democracy

                                                                                 57

973
and with them came their instruments ot murdei, their auto-
matic rifles, their machmeguns, their cannon that could clear

A street two miles long in a few minutes and the helmets that
\he workers of Gary had produced

                         Yes we have no bananas
                              We have no bananas today

              TRACTION RING KILLS BUS BILL

        Drunken Troops in Skirts Dance as Houses Burn

              GIRL SUICIDE WAS FRIEND OF
                                OLIVE THOMAS

                  Kills Self Despite Wife Who Goes Mad

         SEEKS FACTS OF HUNT FOR CASH IN THE EAST

        the business consists in large part of financing manufac-
turers and merchants by purchasing evidences of indebtedness
arising from the sale of a large variety of naturally marketed
products such as automobiles, electrical appliances, machinery



                                    CHARLEY ANDERSON


    “Misser Andson Misser Andson, telegram for Misser
Andson.” Charley held out his hand for the telegram, and
standing in the swaying aisle read the strips of letters
pasted on the paper: down with flu wire me address
SEE YOU NEXT WEEK JOE, ^^A hell of a note/^ he kept say-
ing to himself as he wormed his way back to bis seat past
women closing up their bags, a greyhaired man getting into
his overcoat, the porter loaded with suitcases. ^^A hell of a
noted^ The train was already slowing down for the Grand
Central.

    It was quiet on the grey underground platform when he

          58

974
stepped out of the stuify pullman and took his bag from
the porter^ lonelylooking. He walked up the incline swing-
ing his heavy suitcase. The train had given him a head-
ache. The station was so big it didn’t have the crowded
look he’d remembered New York had. Through the thick
glass of the huge arched windows he could see rain streak-
ing the buildings opposite. Roaming round the station^ not
knowing which way to go^ he found himself looking in the
window of a lunchroom.
    He went m and sat down. The waitress was a little dark
sourfaced girl with rings under her eyes. It was a muggy
sort of day, the smell of soap from the dishwashing and
of hot grease from the kitchen hung in streaks in the air.
When the waitress leaned over to set the place for him
he got a whiff of damp underclothes and armpits and tal-
cumpowder. He looked up at her and tried to get a smile
out of her. When she turned to go get him some tomato-
soup he watched her square bottom moving back and forth
under her black dress. There was something heavy and
lecherous about the rainy eastern day.
   He spooned soup into his mouth without tasting it. Be-
fore he’d finished he got up and went to the phonebooth.
He didn’t have to look up her number. Waiting for the
call he was so nervous the sweat ran down behind his ears.
When a woman’s voice answered, his own voice dried up
way down in his throat. Finally he got it out: want to
speak to Miss Humphries, please.  . . Tell her it^s
Charley Anderson . . . Lieutenant Anderson.” He was

still trying to clear his throat when her voice came in an
intimate caressing singsong. Of course she remembered
him, her voice said, too sweet of him to call her up, of
course they must see each other all the time, how thrilling,
she’d just love to, but she was going out of town for the
weekend, yes, a long weekend. But wouldn’t he call her up
next week, no, towards the end of the week? She’d just
adore to see him.

                                                                                59

975
    When he went back to his table the waitress was fussing
around it. ^^Didn’t you like your soup?” she asked him.
^^Check. . . . Had to make some phonecalls.” ^^Oh,
phonecallsj” she said in a kidding voice. This time it was
the waitress who was trying to get a smile out of him.

^^Let’s have a piece of pie and a cup of coffee,” he said,
keeping his eyes on the billoffare. ^^They got lovely lemon-
meringue pie,” the waitress said with a kind of sigh that
made him laugh. He looked up at her laughing feeling
horny and outafterit again: ^^All right, sweetheart, make it
lemonmenngue.”
    When he^d eaten the pie he paid his check and went
back into the phonebooth. Some woman had been in there
leaving a strong reek of perfume. He called up the Cen-
tury Club to see if Ollie Taylor was in town. They said
he was in Europcj then he called up the Johnsonsj they
were the only people left he knew. Eveline Johnson’s voice
had a deep muffled sound over the phone. When he told
her his name she laughed and said, ^Why, of course we’d
                                                                          we’ll intro-
love to see you. Come down to dinner tonight 5
duce you to the new baby.”
   When he got out of the subway at Astor Place it wasn’t
time to go to dinner yet. He asked the newsvendor which
way Fifth Avenue was and walked up and down the quiet
redbrick blocks. He felt stuffy from the movie he’d killed
the afternoon in. When he looked at his watch it was only
halfpast six. He wasn’t invited to the Johnsoi\s’ till seven.
He’d already passed the house three times when he de-
cided to go up the steps. Their names were scrawled out,
Paul Johnson—Eveline Hutchins, on a card above the bell.
He rang the bell and stood fidgeting with his necktie while
he waited. Nobody answered. He was wondering if he
ought to ring again when Paul Johnson came briskly down
the street from Fifth Avenue with his hat on the back of
his head, whistling as he walked. ^Why, hello, Anderson,
where did you come from?” he asked in an embarrassed
        60

976
voice. He had several bags of groceries that he had to
pile on his left arm before he could shake hands. “Guess
I ought to congratulate you ” said Charley. Paul looked
                                                then he blushed. “Of course
at him blankly for a moment j

, . . the son and heir. .       .  . Oh, well, iris a hostage to
fortune, tharis what they say. .    .
   Paul let him into a large bare oldfashioned room with
flowing purple curtains in the windows. “Just sit down for
a minute. Pll see what Eveline’s up to.” He pointed to a
horsehair sofa and went through the sliding doors into a
back room.
   He came back immediately carefully pulling the door to
behind him. “Why, tharis great, Eveline says you’re goin’
to have supper with us. She said you just came back from
out there. How’d things seem out there I wouldn’t go
back if they paid me now. New York’s a great life if you
don’t weaken.  . ,   . Here, I’ll show you where you can
clean up.  .  . . Eveline’s invited a whole mess of people
to supper. I’ll have to run around to the butcher’s. . . .
Want to wash up!”’
   The bathroom was steamy and smelt of bathsalts. Some-
body had just taken a bath there. Babyclothes hung to dry
over the tub. A red douchebag hung behind the door and
over it a yellow lace negligee of some kind. It made
Charley feel funny to be in there. When he’d dried his
hands he sniffed them, and the perfume of the soap filled

his head.
   When he came out of the door he found Mrs. Johnson
leaning against the white marble mantel with a yellow-
backed French novel in her hand. She had on a long lacy
gown with puff sleeves and wore tortoiseshell reading-
glasses. She took off the glasses and tucked them into the
book and stood holding out her hand.
    “I’m so glad you could come. I don’t go out much yet,
so I don’t get to see anybody unless they come to see me.”
    “Mighty nice of you to ask me. I been out in the sticks.

                                                                                6i

977
I tell you it makes you feel good to see folks from the
other side.  . . . This is the nearest thing to Paree IVe
sem for some time.^^
                          he remembered her laugh from the boat.
    She laughed j
The way he felt like kissing her made him fidgety. He lit
a cigarette.
    ^^Do you mind not smoking? For some reason tobacco-
smoke makes me feel sick ever since before I had the baby,
so I don’t let anybody smoke. Isn’t it horrid of me?”
    Charley blushed and threw his cigarette in the grate.
He began to walk back and forth in the tall narrow room.
“Hadn’t we better sit down?” she said with her slow irri-
tating smile. “What are you up to in New York?”
    “Got to get me a job. I got plans.     .  .  . Say, how’s the
baby? I’d like to see it.”
    “All right, when he wakes up I’ll introduce you. You
can be one of his uncles. I’ve got to do something about
supper now. Doesn’t it seem strange us all being in New
York?”
    “I bet this town’s a hard nut to crack.”
   She went into the back room through the sliding doors
and soon a smell of sizzling butter began to seep through
them. Charley caught himself just at the point of lighting
another cigarette, then roamed round the room, looking
at the oldfashioned furniture, the three white lilies in a
vase, the shelves of French books, until Paul, red in the
face and sw^eating, passed through with more groceries and
told him he’d shake up a drink.
    Charley sat down on the couch and stretched out his
legs. It was quiet in the highceilinged room. There was
something cozy about the light rustle and clatter the John-
sons made moving around behind the sliding doors, the
Frenchy smell of supper cooking. Paul came back with
a tray piled with plates and glasses and a demijohn of
wine. He laid a loaf of frenchbread on the marbletopped
table and a plate of tunafish and a cheese. ^T’m sorry I
         62

978
xiaven’t got anything to make a cocktail with. ... I

didn’t get out of the office till late. . . . All we’ve got’s

this dago wine.”
   “Check.   .  .  . I’m keepin’ away from that stuff a little.
... Too much on my mind.”
    “Are you round town looking for a job?”
    “Feller goin’ in on a proposition with me. You remem-
ber Joe Askew on the boat'’ Great boy, wasn’t he? The
trouble is the damn fool’s laid up with the flu and that

leaves me high and dry until he gets down here.”
    “Things are sure tighter than I expected. . .     . My old
rnan got me into a grainbroker’s office over in Jersey City

         just to tide me over. But gosh, I don’t want to wear
. . .
out a desk all my life. I wouldn’ta done it if it hadn’t been

for the little stranger.”
    “Well, we’ve got something that’ll be worth plenty if
we ever get the kale to put in to develop it.”
    Eveline opened the sliding doors and brought in a bowl

 of salad. Paul had started to talk about the gram business

 but he shut his mouth and waited for her to speak.

     “It’s curious,” she said. “After the war New York.     . .   ,

 Nobody can keep away from it.”
     A baby’s thin squalling followed her out of the back

 room. “That’s his messcall,” said Paul. “If you really

 want to see him,” said Eveline, “come along now, but I

 should think it would be just too boring to look at othei

 people’s babies.” “Pd like to,” said Charley. “Haven’t

 got any of my own to look at.” “How are you so sure'”’

 said Eveline with a slow teasing smile. Charley got red

 and laughed.
     They stood round the pink crib with their wineglasses

 in their hands. Charley found himself looking down intc

 a toothless pink face and two little pudgy hands grabbing

 the air. ^^I suppose I ought to say it looks like F)addy,

  he said. “The little darling looks more like our Darwinian

  ancestor ” said Eveline coldly. “When I first saw him I

                                                                                  63

979
cried and cried. Oh, I hope he grows a chin.” Charley
caught himself looking out of the corner of his eye at
PauPs chin that wasn’t so very prominent either. “He’s
a cheerful little rascal,” he said.
    Eveline brought the baby a bottle from the kitchenette
next the bathroom, then they went into the other room.
^^This layout sure makes me feel envious,” Charley was
saying when he caught Eveline Johnson’s eye. She
shrugged her shoulders. “You two and the baby all nicely
set with a place to live and a glass of wine and everything.

. . . Makes me feel the war’s over. . .        . What I’ve got
to do is crack down an’ get to work.”
    “Don’t worry,” said Paul. “It’ll happen soon enough.”
    “Well, I wish people would come. The casserole’s all
ready,” said Eveline. “Charles Edward Holden is coming.

. . . He’s always late.”
    “He said maybe he’d come,” said Paul. “Here’s A1 now.
That’s his knock.”
    A lanky sallow individual came in the door fron^ the
street. Paul introduced him to Charley as his brother Al.
The man looked at Charley with a peevish searching grey
eye for a moment. “Lieutenant Anderson .    .  . Say, we’ve
met before someplace.”
    “Were you over on the other side?”
    The lanky man shook his head vigorously. “No. ... It
must have been in New York. ... I never forget a face,”
Charley felt his face getting red.
    A tall haggardfaced man named Stevens and a plump
little girl came in. Charley didn’t catch the girl’s name.
She had straight black bobbed hair. The man named
Stevens paid no attention to anybody but Al Johnson. The
little girl paid no attention to anybody but Stevens. “Well,
Al,” he said threateningly, “have recent events changed
your ideas any?”
    “We’ve got to go slow, Don, we’ve got to go slow ,  *

         64

980
we can^t affront every decent human instinct. .  . . WeVe
got to stick close to the workingclsiss.”
   “Oh, if yotfre all going to start about the workingclass
I think we^d better have supper and not wait for Holden,”
said Eveline, getting to her feet. “Don^ll be so cross if he
argues on an empty stomach.”
   “Who’s that? Charles Edward Holden^” asked A1
Johnson with a tone of respect in his voice.
   “Don’t wait for him,” said Don Stevens. “He’s nothing
but a bourgeois muckraker.”
   Charley and Paul helped Eveline bring in another table
that was all set in the bedroom. Charley managed to sit
next to her. “Gee, this is wonderful food. It all makes me
think of old Paree,” he kept saying. “My brother wanted
me to go into a Ford agency with him out in the Twin
Cities, but how can you keep them down on the farm after
they’ve seen Paree?”
    “But New York’s the capital now.” It was teasing the
way she leaned toward him when she spoke, the way her
long eyes seemed to be all the time figuring out something
about him.
    “I hope you’ll let me come around sometimes,” he said.
“It’s goin’ to be kinder hard sleddin’ in New York till I
get my feet on the ground.”
    “Oh, I’m always here,” she said, “and shall be till we
can afford to get a reliable nurse for Jeremy. Poor Paul
has to work late at the office half the time. .        .  . Oh, I
wish we could all make a lot of money right away quick-”
    Charley smiled grimly. “Give the boys a chance. We
ain’t properly got the khaki off our skins yet.”
    Charley couldn’t keep up with the conversation very
well so he leaned back on the sofa looking at Eveline
Johnson, Paul didn’t say much either. After he’d brought
in coffee he disappeared altogether. Eveline and the little

girl at the head of the table both seemed to think Stevens
was pretty wonderful, and A1 Johnson who sat next t**

                                                                                65

981
Charley on the sofa Kept leaning across him to make st
point with Eveline and shake his long forefinger. Part
of the time it looked like A1 Johnson and Stevens would
take a poke at each other. What with not following their
talk, after all he wasn’t onto the town yet, and the good
food and the wine Charley began to get sleepy. He finally
had to get up to stretch his legs.
    Nobody paid any attention to him so he strolled into
the kitchenelte where he found Paul washing the dishes.
^^Lemme help you wipe,” he said. ^^Naw, I got a system,”
said Paul. “You see Eveline does all the cooking so it’s
only fair for me to wash the dishes.”
    “Say, won’t those birds get in trouble if they talk like
thatf'” Charley jerked his thumb in the direction of the
front room.
    “Don Stevens is a red so he’s a marked man anyway.”
    “Mind you, I don’t say they’re wrong but, Jesus, we got
our iivm’s to make.”
   “Al’s on the World. They’re pretty liberal down there.”
   “Out our way a man can’t open his face without stirrin’
up a hornetsnest,” said Charley, laughing. “They don’t
know the war’s over.”
   When the dishes were done they went back to the front
room. Don Stevens strode up to Charley. “Eveline says
you are an aviator,” he said, frowning. “Tell us what avia-
tors think about. Are they for the exploiting class or the
workingclass?”
    “That’s a pretty big order,” drawled Charley. “Most of
the fellers I know are tryin’ to get into the workin’class.”
   The doorbell rang, Eveline looked up smiling. “That’s
probably Charles Edward Holden,” said Al. Paul opened
the door. “Hello, Dick,” said Eveline. “Everybody
thought you were Charles Edward Holden.”
    “Well, maybe I am,” said a nattilydressed young man
with slightlybulging blue eyes who appeared in the door-
way. “I’ve been feeling a little odd all day.”
        66

982
   Evefine introduced the new guy by his military handle;
‘Captain Savage, Lieutenant Anderson.” “Humph,” said
Stevens in the back of the room. Charley noticed that
Stevens and the young man who had just come in stared
at each other without speaking. It was all getting very con-
fusing. Eveline and the bobbedhaired girl began to make
polite remarks to each other in chilly voices. Charley
guessed it was about time for him to butt out. “I’ve got to
alley along, Mrs. Johnson,” he said.
   “Say, Anderson, wait for me a minute. I’ll vralfc along
the street with you,” A1 Johnson called across the room at
him.
   Charley suddenly found himself looking right in Eve-
line’s eyes. “I sure enjoyed it,” he said. “Come in to tea
some afternoon,” she said. “All right. I’ll do that.” He
squeezed her hand hard. While he was saying goodby to
the others he heard Captain Savage and Eveline giggling
together. “I just came in to see how the other half lives,”
he was saying. “Eveline, you look too beautiful tonight.”
    Charley felt good standing on the stoop in the spring
evening. The city air had a cool rinsed smell after the
ram. He was wondering if she . . . Well, you never can
tell till you try. A1 Johnson came out behind him and took
his arm. “Say, Paul says you come from out home.”
    “Sure,” said Charley. “Don’t you see the hayseed in my
ears?”
    “Gosh, when Eveline has two or more of her old beaux
calling on her at once it’s a bit heavy. . . . And she like

to froze that poor little girl of Don’s to death. .        . . Say,
how about you and me go have a drink of whiskey to take
the taste of that damn red ink out of our mouths?”
    “That’ud be great,” said Charley.
    They walked across Fifth Avenue and down the street

until they got to a narrow black door. A1 Johnson rang
the bell and a man in shirtsleeves let them into a passag*

that smelt of toilets. They walked through that into a bar

                                                                                ^7

983
room. ‘‘Well, that^s more like it,” said A1 Johnson. “After
all I only have one night off a week.”
   “It^s like the good old days that never were,” said
Charley.
   They sat down at a small round table opposite the bar
and ordered rye. A1 Johnson suddenly waved his long
forefinger across the table. “I remember when it was I
met you. It was the day war was declared. We were all
drunk as coots down at Little Hungary.” Charley said
jeez, he^d met a lot of people that night. “Sure that’s
when it was,” said A1 Johnson. “1 never forget a face,”
and he called to the waiter to make it beer chasers.
   They had several more ryes with beer chasers on the
strength of old times. “Why, New York’s like any other
dump,” Charley w’’as saying, “it’s just a village.” “Green-
wich Village,” said A1 Johnson.
    They had a flock of whiskeys on the strength of the
good old times they’d had at Little Hungary. They didn’t
like it at the table any more so they stood up at the bar.
There were two pallid young men at the bar and a plump
girl with stringy hair in a Bulgarian embroidered blouse.
They were old friends of A1 Johnson’s. “An old news-
paperman,” A1 Johnson was saying, “never forgets faces
... or names.” He turned to Charley. “Colonel, meet
my very dear friends . . . Colonel . .         . er . .          Char-
ley had put out his hand and was just about to say Ander-
son when A1 Johnson came out with “Charles Edward
Holden, meet my artistical friends.    .  .
    Charley never got a chance to put a word m. The two
young men started to explain the play they’d been to at
the Washington Square Players. The girl had a turnedup
nose and blue eyes with dark rings under them. The eyes
looked up at him effusively while she shook his hand. “Not
really. .    . . Oh, I’ve so wanted to met you, Mr. Holden.
I read all your articles.” “But I’m not really . . .” started
Charley. “Not really 2 colonel,” said the girl. “Just a
         68

984
colonel for a night,” said A1 with a wave of his hand and
ordered some more whiskies.
    “Oh, Mr. Holden,” said the girl, who put her whiskey
away like a trooper, “isn^t it wonderful that we should
meet like thisi^ ... I thought you were much older and
not so goodlooking. Now, Mr. Holden, I want you to tell
me all about everything.”
    “Better call me Charley.”
    “My name’s Bobbie . .      . you call me Bobbie, won’t
you?” “Check,” said Charley. She drew him away down
the bar a little. “I was having a rotten time. . . . They
are dear boys, but they won’t talk about anything except
how Philip drank iodine because Edward didn’t love him
any more. I hate personalities, don’t you? I like to talk,
don’t you? Oh, I hate people who don’t do things. I mean
books and world conditions and things like that, don’t
you?” “Sure,” said Charley.
    They found themselves at the end of the bar. A1 John-
son seemed to have found a number of other very dear
friends to celebrate old times with. The girl plucked at
Charley’s sleeve: “Suppose we go somewhere quiet and

talk. I can’t hear myself think in here.” “Do you know
someplace we can dance?” asked Charley. The girl nodded.
    On the street she took his arm. The wind had gone
into the north, cold and gusty. “Let’s skip,” said the girl,
“or are you too dignified, Mr. Holden?” “Better call me
Charley.” They walked east and down a street full of tene-
ments and crowded little Italian stores. The girl rang at a
basement door. While they were waiting she put her hand
on his arm. “I got some money ... let this be my
party.” “But I wouldn’t like that.” “All right, we’ll make

it fifty-fifty. I believe in sexual equality, don’t you?’'
Charley leaned over and kissed her. “Oh, this is a wonder-
ful evening for me. ... You are the nicest celebrity I
ever met.  . . . Most of them are pretry stuflEy, don’t you

                                                                                69

985
think so^ No joie de vivre.”                  stammered Charlcyj
         not  .  .
   As he spoke the door opened. ^^Hello, Jimmy,” said the
girl to a slicklooking young man in a brown suit w’^ho
opened the door. ^^Meet the boyfriend . .      . Mr. Grady

.  . . Mr. Holden.” The young man’s eyes flashed. “Not
Charles Edward .   . .” The girl nodded her head excit-
edly so that a big lock of her hair flopped over one eye.
“Well, sir, Fm very happy to meet you. . .        . I’m a con-
stant reader, sir.”
    Bowing and blushing Jimmy found them a table next
to the dancefloor in the stuffy little cabaret hot from the
spotlights and the cigarettesmoke and the crowded dancers.
They ordered more whiskey and welshrabbits. Then she
grabbed Charley’s hand and pulled him to his feet. They
danced. The girl rubbed close to him till he could feel her
little round breasts through the Bulgarian blouse.
    “My . .     . the boy can dance,” she whispered. “Let’s
forget everything, who we are, the day of the week . . .”
    “Me ... I forgot two hours ago,” said Charley, giv-
ing her a squeeze.
    “You’re just a plain farmerlad and Fm a barefoot girl.”
    “More truth than poetry to that,” said Charley through
his teeth.
    “Poetry . .     . I love poetry, don’t you
    They danced until the place closed up. They were stag-
gering when they got out on the black empty streets. They
stumbled past garbagepails. Cats ran out from under their
feet. They stopped and talked about free love with a cop.
At every corner they stopped and kissed. As she was look-
ing for her latchkey in her purse she said thoughtfully:
“People who really do things make the most beautiful
lovers, don’t you think so?”
    Charley woke up first. Sunlight was streaming in
through an uncurtained window. The girl was asleep, her
face pressed into the pillow. Her mouth was open and
         70

986
she looked considerably older than she had the night be-
fore. Her skin was pasty and green and she had stringy
hair.
   Charley put his clothes on quietly. On a big table inches
deep in dust and littered with drawings of funnylooking
nudes, he found a piece of charcoal. On the back of a sheet
of yellow paper that had a half a poem written on it he
wrote: Had a swell time. . . . Goodby. .         . . Goodluck.
Charley. He didn’t put his shoes on until he got to the
bottom of the creaky stairs.
    Out on the street in the cold blowy spring morning he
felt wonderful. He kept bursting out laughing. A great
little old town. He went into a lunchroom at the corner of
Eighth Street and ordered himself a breakfast of scram-
bled eggs and bacon and hotcakes and coffee. He kept
giggling as he ate it. Then he went uptown to Fortysecond
Street on the el. Grimy roofs, plateglass windows, grimy
bulbs of electriclight signs, fireescapes, watertanks all
looked wonderful in the gusty sunlight.
    At the Grand Central Station the clock said eleven-
thirty. Porters were calling the names of westbound trains.
He got his bag from the checkroom and took a taxi to the
Chatterton House. That was where Joe Askew had written
he ought to stay, a better address than the Y. His suitcase
cut into his hand as it was heavy from blueprints and
books on mechanical drawing, so he jumped into a taxi.
When the clerk at the desk asked for a reference he
brought out his reserve commission.
    The place had an elevator and baths and showers at the
ends of the dimlylit halls, and a lot of regulations on the
back of the door of the little shoebox of a room they
showed him into. He threw himself on the cot with his
clothes on. He was sleepy. He lay giggling looking up at
the ceiling. A great little old town.
    As it turned out he lived a long time in that stuffy little
greenpapered room with its rickety mission furniture. The

                                                                                71

987
first few days he went around to see all the aviation con-
cerns he found listed in the phonebook to see if he could
pick up some kind of temporary job. He ran into a couple
of men he^d known overseas, but nobody could promise
him a job, if he^d only come a couple of months sooner.
Everybody said things were slack. The politicians had
commercial aviation by the short hairs and there you were,
that was that. Too damn many flyers around looking for
jobs anyway.
    At the end of the first week he came back from a trip

to a motorbuilding outfit in Long Island City, where they
halfpromised him a drafting job later in the summer, that

IS if they got the contract their Washington man was lay-
ing for, to find a letter from Mrs. Askew: Joe v/as a very
sick man, double pneumonia. It would be a couple of
months before he could get to the city. Joe had insisted on
her writing though she didn^t think he was well enough to
worry about business matters, but she’d done it to ease his
mind. He said for Charley to be sure not to let anybody
else see his plans until he got a patent, better get a job to
tide over until they could get the thing started right.
    Tide over, hell, Charley sat on his sagging bed count-
ing his money. Four tens, a two, a one and fiftythree cents
in change. With the room eight dollars a week that didn’t
make his summer’s prospects look so hot.
    At last one day he got hold of Dons Humphries on
the phone and she asked him to come on up next after-
noon. At the Humphries’ apartment it was just like it had
been at the Bentons’ the night he went there with Ollie
Taylor, except that there was a maid instead of a butler.
 He felt pretty uncomfortable because there were only
women there. Doris’s mother was a haggard dressedup
woman who gave him a searching look that he felt went
 right through him into the wallet in his back pocket.
     They had tea and cakes, and Charley wasn^t sure if he
 ought to smoke or not. They said Ollie Taylor had gone

         72

988
abroad again, to the south of France, and as Oliie Ta}lor
was the only thing he had in common with them to talk
about, that pretty well dried up the conveisation. Dressed
m civies it wasn’t so easy talking to rich women as it had
been in the uniform. Still Dons smiled at him nicely and
talked in a friendly confidential way about how sick she
was of this society whirl and eveiythmg, that she was
going out and get her a job. That’s not so easy, thought
Charley. She complained she never met any interesting
men. She said Charley and Ollie Taylor—of course Ollie
was an old dear—were the only men she knew she could
stand talking to.       guess it’s the war and going overseas
that’s done something to you,"’ she said, looking up at him.
“When you’ve seen things like that you can’t take your-
self so seriously as these miserable loungelizards I have
to meet. They are nothing but clotheshangers.”
    When Charley left the big apartmenthouse his head
was swimming so he was almost bagged by a taxicab cross-
ing the street. He walked down the broad avenue hum-
ming with traffic in the early dark. She’d promised to go
to a show with him one of these nights.
    When he went to get Doris to take her out to dinner
one evening in early May, after the engagement had been
put off from week to week—she was so terribly busy, she
always complained over the phone, she’d love to come
but she was so terribly busy—he only had twenty bucks
left in his wallet. He waited for her some time alone in
the drawingroom of the Humphries’ apartment. White
covers had been hung on the piano and the chairs and
curtains and the big white room smelt of mothballs. It all
gave him a feeling he’d come too late. Doris came in at

last looking so pale and silky and golden in a lowcut eve-
 ningdress it made him catch his breath. “Hello, Charley,
 I hope you’re not starved,” she said in that intimate way
that always made him feel he’d known her a long time.
 “You know I never could keep track of the time,”

                                                                                 73

989
   ^^Gosh, Dons, you look wonderfuL^^ He caught her
looking at his grey business suit. “Oh, forgive me,” she

said. “Fll run and change my clothes.” Something chilly
came into her voice and left it at once. “IFll take only a
minute.” He felt himself getting red. “I guess I oughta
have worn eveningclothes,” he said. “But Pve been so
busy. I haven^t had my trunk sent out from Minnesota
yet.” “Of course not. Ids almost summer. I don^t know
what I was thinking about. Wits woolgathering again.”
    “Couldn’t you go like that, you look lovely.”
    “But it looks so silly to see a girl dressed up like a
plush horse with a man in a business suit. It’ll be more fun
anyway .  . . less the social engagement, you know. . . 
Honestly I’ll be only five minutes by the clock.”
    Doris went out and half an hour later came back in a
pearlgrey streetdress. A maid followed her in with a tray
with a cocktailshaker and glasses. “1 thought we might
have a drink before we go out. Then we’ll be sure to
know what we are getting,” she said.
    He took her to the McAlpin for supper; he didn’t
know anyplace else. It was already eight o’clock. The
theatertickets were burning his pocket, but she didn’t seem
in any hurry. It was halfpast nine when he put her in a
taxi to go to the show. The taxi filled up with the light
crazy smell of her perfume and her hair. “Doris, lemme
say what I want to say for a minute,” he blurted out sud-
denly. “I don’t know whether you like anybody else very
much. I kinder don’t think you do from what you said
about the guys you know.”
    “Oh, please don’t propose,” she said. “If you knew how
1 hated proposals, particularly in a cab caught in a traffic
jam.”
    “No, I don’t mean that. You wouldn’t want to marry
me the way I am now anyway ... not by a Jong shot.
1 gotta get on my hindlegs first. But I’m goin’ to pretty
soon. . . . You know aviation is the cornin’ industry. .  .

         74

990
Ten years from now .    .  , Well, us fellers have a chance
to get m on the ground floor, ... I want you to give
me a break, Dons, hold off the other guys for a little
while. . .
    “Wait for you ten years, my, that’s a romantic nodon

. ,   . my grandmother would have thought it was lovely.”
    “I mighta known you’d kid about it. Well, here we
are.”
    Charley tried to keep from looking sour when he helped
Doris out. She squeezed his hand just for a second as she
leaned on it. HiS heart started pounding. As the}^ followed
the usher into the dark theater full of girls and jazz she
put her small hand very lightly on his arm. Above their
heads was the long powdery funnel of the spotlight
spreading to a tinselly glitter where a redlipped girl in
organdy was dancing. He squeezed Doris’s hand hard
against his ribs with his arm. “All right, you get what I
mean,” he whispered. “You think about it .    . . IVe never
had a girl get me this way before, Dons.” They dropped
into their seats. The people behind started shushing, so
Charley had to shut up. He couldn’t pay any attention to
the show.
    “Charley, don’t expect anything, but I think you’re a
swell guy,” she said when, stuffy from the hot theater and
 the lights and the crowd, they got into a taxi as the} came
out. She let him kiss her, but terribly soon the taxi stopped
at her apartnienthouse. He said goodnight to her at the
 elevator. She shook her head with a smile when he asked
 if he could come up.
     He walked home weak in the knees through the after-
 thetheater bustle of Park Avenue and Fortysecond Street.
 He could still feel her mouth on his mouth, the smell of
 her pale frizzy hair, the littleness of her hands on his
 chest when she pushed his face away from hers.
     The next morning he woke late feeling pooped as if
 he’d been on a threeday drunk. He bought the papers and

                                                                                75

991
had a cup of coffee and a doughnut at the coffeebar that
stank of stale swill. This time he didn’t look in the Busi-
ness Opportunities column but under Mechanics and Ma-
chinists. That afternoon he got a job in an automobile re-
pairshop on First Avenue. It made him feel bad to go
back to the overalls and the grease under your fingernails
and punching the timeclock like that but there was no
help for it. When he got back to the house he found a
letter from Emiscah that made him feel worse than ever.
    The minute he’d read the letter he tore it up. Nothing
doingj bad enough to go back to grinding valves without
starting that stuff up again. He sat down on the bed with
his eyes full of peeved tears. It was too goddamned hellish

to have everything close in on him like this after getting
his commission and the ambulance service and the Lafa-
yette Escadnlle and having a mechanic attend to his plane
and do all the dirty work. Of all the lousy stinking luck.
When he felt a little quieter he got up and wrote Joe for
Christ’s sake to get well as soon as he could, that he had
turned down an offer of a job with Triangle Motors over
in Long Island City and was working as a mechanic in
order tc tide over and that he was darn sick of it and
darned anxious to get going on their little proposition.
    He’d worked at the repairshop for two weeks before he
found out that the foreman ran a pokergame every pay-
day in a disused office in the back of the building. He got
in on it and played pretty carefully. The first couple of
w'eeks he lost half his pay, but then he began to find that
he wasn’t such a bad pokerplayer at that. He never lost
 his temper and was pretty good at doping out where the
cards were. He was careful not to blow about his winnings
 either, so he got away with more of their money than the
 other guys figured. The foreman was a big loudmouthed
 harp who wasn’t any too pleased to have Charley horning
                                it had been his habit to take the money
 in on his winnings j
 away from the boys himself. Charley kept him oiled up
         76

992
with a drink now and then, and besides, once he got his
hand m he could get through more work than any man
there. He always changed into his good clothes before
he went home.
    He didn’t get to see Doris before she went to Tork
Harbor for the summer. The only people he knew were
the Johnsons. He went down there a couple of times a
week. He built them bookshelves and one Sunday helped
them paint the livingroom floor.
    Another Sunday he called up early to see if the John-
sons wanted to go down to Long Beach to take a swim.
Paul was in bed with a sorethroat but Eveline said she’d
go. Well, if she wants it she can have it, he was telling
himself as he walked downtown, through the empty grime
of the hot sundaymorning streets. She came to the door
in a loose yellow silk and lace negligee that showed where
her limp breasts began. Before she could say anything he’d
pulled her to him and kissed her. She closed her eyes and
let herself go limp in his arms. Then she pushed him away
and put her finger on her lips.
    He blushed and lit a cigarette. “Do you mind?” lie
said in a shaky voice.
    “I’ll have to get used to cigarettes again sometime, I
suppose,” she said very low.
    He walked over to the window to pull himself together.
 She followed him and reached for his cigarette and took
a couple of puffs of it. Then she said aloud in a cool voice,
 “Come on back and say hello to Paul.”
    Paul was lying back against the pillows looking pale
 and sweaty. On a table beside the bed there was a coffee-
 pot and a flowered cup and saucer and a pitcher of hot
 milk. “Hi, Paul, you look like you was leadin’ the life
 of Riley,” Charley heard himself say in a hearty voice.
 “Oh, you have to spoil them a little when they’re sick,’*
 cooed Eveline. Charley found himself laughing too loud,
 “Hope it’s nothin’ serious, old top.” “Naw, I get these

                                                                                 77

993
flamn throats. You kids have a good time at the beach,

I wish I could come too,^’
   ^^Oh, it may be horrid/^ said Eveline. ^^But if we don’t

like it we can always come back.” ^^Don’t hurry said
Paul.      got plenty to read. I’ll be fine here.”
   ^Wellj you and Jeremy keep bachelor hall together,”
   Eveline had gotten up a luncheonbasket with some sand-
wiches and a thermos full of cocktails. She looked veiy
stylish, Charley thought, as he walked beside her along
the dusty sunny street carrying the basket and the Sunday
paper, in her little turnedup white hat and her lightyellow
summer dress. ^^Oh, let’s have fun,” she said. “It’s been
so long since I had any fun.”
    When they got out of the train at Long Beach a great
blue wind was streaming off the sea blurred by little cool
patches of mist. There was a big crowd along the board-
walk. The two of them walked a long way up the beach.
“Don’t you think it would be fun if we could get away
from everybody?” she was saying. They walked along,
their feet sinking into the sand, their voices drowned in
the pound and hiss of the surf. “This is great stuff,” he
kept saying.
    They walked and walked. Charley had his bathingsuit

                                   it had got to feel hot and itchy be-
on under his clothes 5
fore they found a place they liked. They set the basket
down behind a low dune and Eveline took her clothes off
under a big towel she’d brought with her. Charley felt a
little shy pulling off his shirt and pants right in front of
her but that seemed to be on the books.
    “My, you’ve got a beautiful body,” she said, Charley
 tugged xmeasily at the end of his bathingsuit. “I’m pretty
 healthy, I guess,” he said. He looked at his hands sticking
 out red and grimed from the white skin of his forearms
 that were freckled a little under the light fuzz. “I sure
 would like to get a job where I could keep my hands
 dean.” “A man’s hands ought to show his work. . * .

         78

994
That^s the whole beauty o£ hands/’ said Eveline. She had
wriggled into her suit and let drop the towel. It was a
paleblue onepiece suit very tight. ^^Gosh, you’ve got a
pretty figure. That’s what I first noticed about you on the
boat.” She stepped over and took his arm. ^^Let’s go in/’
she said. “The surf scares me, but it’s terribly beautiful

, . . Oh, I think this is fun, don’t you?”
   Her arm felt very silky against his. He could feel her
bare thigh against his bare thigh. Their feet touched as
they walked out of the hot loose sand onto the hard cool
sand. A foaming wide tongue of seawater ran up the beach
at them and wet their legs to the knees. She let go his
arm and took his hand.
    He hadn’t had much practice with surf and the first
ching he knew a wave had knocked him galleywest. He
came up spluttering with his mouth and ears full of water.
She was on her feet laughing at him holding out her hand
to help him to his feet. “Come on out further,” she
shouted. They ducked through the next wave and swam
out. Just outside of the place where the waves broke they
bobbed up and down treading water. “Net too far out,
on account of the seapussies. . . “What?” “Currents,”
she shouted, putting her mouth close to his ear.
      He got swamped by another roller and came up spit-
ting and gasping. She was swimming on her back with
her eyes closed and her lips pouted. He took two strokes
towards her and kissed her cold wet face. He tried to grab
her round the body but a wave broke over their heads.
She pushed him off as they came up sputtering. “You made
 me lose my bathingcap. Look.” “There it is. I’ll get it.”
 He fought his way back through the surf and grabbed the
 cap just as the undertow was sucking it under. “Some
 surf,” he yelled.
     She followed him out and stood beside him in the shaT
 low spume with her short hair wet over her eyes. She
 brushed it back with her hand. “Here we are,” she said

                                                                                 79

995
Charley looked both ways down the beach. There was
nobody to be seen in the earlyafternoon glare. He tried
to put his arm around her. She skipped out of his reach.
^^Charley . . . aren^t you starved^” ^^For you, Eveline.”
^^hat I want’s lunch.”
    When they’d eaten up the lunch and drunk all the
cocktails they felt drowsy and a little drunk. They lay
side by side in the sun on the big towel. She made him
keep his hands to himself. He closed his eyes but he was
too excited to go to sleep. Before he knew it he was talk-
ing his head off. ^^You see Joe’s been workin’ on the patent
end of it, and he knows how to handle the lawyers and the
big boys with the big wads. I’m afraid if I try to go into

it alone some bird’ll go to work and steal my stuff. That’s
what usually happens when a guy invents anything.”
    ^^Do women ever tell you how attractive you are,
Charley?”
     “Overseas I didn’t have any trouble.     . .  You know,
 A-viat-err, lewtenong, Croix de Guerre, couchay, wee wee.

 .  .  . That was all right but in this man’s country no girl
 you want’ll look at a guy unless he’s loaded up with jack.

 .  .  , Sure, they’ll lead you on an’ get you halfcrazy.” He
 was a fool to do it but he went to work and told her all
 about Doris. “But they’re not all like that,” she said, strok-
 ing the back of his hand. “Some women are square.”
     She wouldn’t let him do anything but cuddle a little
 with her under the towel. The sun began to get low. They
 got up chilly and sandy and with the sunburn starting to
 tease- As they walked back along the beach he felt sour
 and blue. She was talking about the evening and the waves
 and the seagulls and squeezing his arm as she leaned on
  it. They went into a hotel on the boardwalk to have a
  little supper and that just about cleaned his last fivespot.
      He couldn’t thmk of much to say going home on the
  train. He left her at the corner of her street, then walked
  over to the Third Avenue el and took the train uptown.
           8o

996
The tram was full of fellows and girls coming home from
Sunday excursions. He kept his eye peeled for a pickup
but there was nothing doing. When he got up into his
little stuffy greenpapered room, he couldn’t stay In it. He
went out and roamed up and down Second and Third
avenues. One woman accosted him but she was too fat and
old. There was a pretty plump little girl he walked along
beside for a long time, but she threatened to call a cop
when he spoke to her, so he went tack to his room and
took a hot shower and a cold shower and piled into bed.
He didn’t sleep a wink all night.
    Eveline called him up so often in the next weeks and
left so many messages for him that the clerk at the desk
took him aside and warned him that the house was only
intended for young men of irreproachable Christian life.
    He took to leaving the shop early to go out with her
places, and towards the end of July the foreman bounced
him. The foreman was getting sore anyway because
Charley kept on winning so much money at poker. Charley
moved away from the Chatterton House and took a fur-
nished room way east on Fifteenth Street, explaining to
the landlady that his wife worked out of town and could
only occasionally get in to see him. The landlady added
two dollars to the rent and let it go at that. It got so he
 didn’t do anything all day but wait for Eveline and drink
lousy gin he bought In an Italian restaurant. He felt bad
about Paul, but after all Paul wasn’t a particular friend of
 his and if it wasn’t him he reckoned It would be somebody
 else. Eveline talked so much it made his head spin but
 she was certainly a stylishlooking rib and in bed she was
 swell. It was only when she talked about divorcing Paul
 and marrying him that he began to feel a little chilly.
 She was a good sport about paying for dinners and lunches
 when the money he’d saved up working in the shop gave
 out, but he couldn’t very well let her pay for his rent, so
 he walked out on the landlady early one morning in Sep 

                                                                                 8x

997
tember and took his bag up to the Grand Central station.
That same day he went by the Chatterton House to get
his mail and found a letter from Emiscah.
   He sat on a bench in the park behind the Public Library
along with the other bums and read it:

Charley Boy,
    You always had such & heart of gold I know if you
knew about what awful luck Pve been having you would
do something to help me. First I lost my job and things
have been so slack around here this summer I haven’t been
                                  then I was sick and had to pay the
able to get another 3
doctor fifty dollars and I haven’t been really what you
might call well since, and so I had to draw out my savings-
account and now it’s all gone. The family won’t do any-
thing because they’ve been listening to some horrid lying
stories too silly to deny. But now I’ve got to have ten
dollars this week or the landlady will put me out and I
don’t know what will become of me. I know I’ve never
done anything to deserve being so unhappy. Oh, I wish
you were here so that you could cuddle me in your big
strong arms like you used to do. You used to love your
poor little Emiscah. For the sake of your poor mother
that’s dead send me ten dollars right away by specia-l de-
livery so it won’t be too late. Sometimes I think it would
be better to turn on the gas. The tears are running down
 my face so that I can’t see the paper any more. God bless

                                                                           Emiscah

     My girlfriend’s broke too. You make such big money
 ten dollars won’t mean anything and \ promise I won’t
 ask you again.
     Charley, if you can’t make it ten send five.


     Charley scowled and tore up the letter and put the
 pieces in his pocket. The letter made him feel bad, but

          82

998
what was the use? He walked over to the Hotel Astor
and went down to the men’s room to wash up. He looked
at himself in one of the mirrors. Grey suit still looked
pretty good, his straw hat was new and his shirt was clean.
The tie had a frayed place but it didn’t show if you kept
the coat buttoned. All right if it didn’t rain, he’d already
hocked his other suit and his trenchcoat and his officers’
boots. He still had a couple of dollars in change so he had
his shoes shined. Then he went up to the writingroom and
wrote to Joe that he was on his uppers and please to send
him twentyfive by mail P.D.Q. and for crissake to come
to New York. He mailed the letter and walked downtown,
walking slowly down Broadway.
    The only place he knew where he could bum a meal
was the Johnsons’ so he turned into their street from Fifth
Avenue. Paul met him at the door and held out his hand.
^^Hello, Charley,” he said.      haven’t seen you for a dog’s
age.”
          been movin’,” stammered Charley, feeling like a
louse. ^^Too many bedbugs in that last dump. .    . . Say,

I just stopped in to say hello.”
    ^^Come on in and I’ll shake up a drink. Eveline’ll be
back in a minute.”
    Charley was shaking his head. ^^No, I just stopped to
say hello. How’s the kid? Give Eveline my best. I got a
date.”
    He walked to a newsstand at the corner of Eighth
Street and bought all the papers. Then he went to a blind-

tiger he knew and had a session with the helpwanted col-
 umns over some glasses of needle beer. He drank the beer
 slowly and noted down the addresses on a piece of paper
 he’d lifted off the Hotel Astor. One of them was a used-

 car dealer, where the manager was a friend of Jim’s.
 Charley had met him out home.
    The lights went on and the windows got dark with a

 stuffy latesummer night. When he’d paid for the beer he

                                                                                83

999
                                                                                         —





only had a quarter left in his pocket. ^^Damn it, this is the
last time I let myself get in a jam like this,” he kept mut-
tering as he wandered round the downtown streets. He
sat for a long time in Washington Square, thinking about
what kind of a salestalk he could give the manager of that
usedcar dump.
   A light rain began to fall. The streets were empty by
this time. He turned up his collar and started to walk. His
shoes had holes m them and with each step he could feel
the cold water squish between his toes. Under an arclight
he took off his straw hat and looked at it. It was already
gummy and the rim had a swollen pulpy look. ^^Now how
in Christas name am I goin^ to go around to get me a job
tomorrow?”
    He turned on his heel and walked straight uptown
towards the Johnsons^ place. Every minute it rained
harder. He rang the bell under the card Paul Johnson
Eveline Hutchins until Paul came to the door in pyjamas
looking very sleepy.
    ^^Say, Paul, can I sleep on your couch?” ^TPs pretty
hard.  .  . . Come in. ... I don’t know if we’ve got any
                                                           just for tonight, . . .
clean sheets.” ^^That’s all right .  .  .
You see I got cleaned out in a crapgame. I got jack cornin’
tomorrow. I thought Pd try the benches but the sonofa-
bitch started to rain on me. I got business to attend to
tomorrow an’ I got to keep this suit good, see?” “Sure.

.  .  . Say, you look wet .     .  . I’ll lend you a pair of py-
jamas and a bathrobe. Better take those things off.”
    It was dry and comfortable on the Johnsons’ couch.
After Paul had gone back to bed Charley lay there in
Paul’s bathrobe looking up at the ceiling. Through the
tall window he could see the rain flickering through the
streetlights outside and hear its continuous beat on the
pavement. The baby woke up and cried, there was a light
in the other room. He could hear Paul’s and Eveline’s
sleepy voices and the rustle of them stirring around. Then
         84

1000
the baby quieted down, the light went out. Everything was
quiet in the beating ram again. He went off to sleep.
    Getting up and having breakfast with them was no
picnic nor was borrowing twentyfive dollars from Paul
though Charley knew' he could pay it back in a couple of
days. He left when Paul left to go to the office without
paying attention to Eveline^s sidelong kidding glances.
Never get in a jam like this again, he kept saying to him-
self.
    First he went to a tailor’s and sat there behind a curtain
reading the American while his suit was pressed. Then he
bought himself a new straw hat, went to a barbershop and
had a shave, a haircut, a facial massage and a manicure
and went to a cobbler’s to get his shoes shined and soled.
    By that time it was almost noon. He went uptown on
the subway and talked himself mto a job as salesman in
the secondhand autosales place above Columbus Circle
where the manager was a friend of Jim’s. When the guy
asked Charley about how the folks out in Minneapolis
were getting on, he had to make up a lot of stuff. That
evening he got his laundry from the Chinaman and his
things out of hock and went back to a room, with brown
walls this time, at the Chatterton House. He set himself
up to a good feed and went to bed early deadtired.
    A few days later a letter came from Joe Askew with
the twentyfive bucks and the news that he was getting on
his feet and would be down soon to get to work. Mean-
while Charley was earning a small amount on commissions
but winning or losing up to a century a night in a poker-
game on Sixtythird Street one of the salesmen took him
up to. They were mostly automobile salesmen and adver-
tising men in the game and they were free spenders and
rolled up some big pots. Charley mailed the twentyfive
he owed him down to Paul, and when Eveline called him
up on the telephone always said he was terribly busy and
 would call her soon. No more of that stuff, nosiree. When-

                                                                                 85

1001
ever he woiij he put half of his winnings in a savingsbank
account heM opened. He carried the bankbook in his in-
side pocket. When he noticed it there it always made him
feel like a wise guy.
    He kept away from Eveline. It was hard for him to
get so far downtown and he didn’t need to anyway because
one of the other salesmen gave him the phonenumber of
an apartment in a kind of hotel on the West Side, where
a certain Mrs. Darling would arrange meetings with agree-
able young women if she were notified early enough in
the clay. It cost twentyfive bucks a throw but the girls
were clean and young and there were no followups of any
kind. The fact that he could raise twentyfive bucks to blow
that way made him feel pretty good, but it ate into his
poker winnings. After a session with one of Mrs. Darling’s
telephone numbers, he’d go back to his room at the Chat-
terton House feeling blue and disgusted. The girls were
all right, but it wasn’t fun like it had been with Eveline
or even with Emiscah. He’d think of Doris and say to
himself goshdarn it, he had to get him a woman of his
own.
    He took to selling fewer cars and playing more poker
as the weeks went on and by the time he got a wire from
Joe Askew saying he was coming to town next day his
job had just about petered out. He could tell that it was
only because the manager was a friend of Jim’s that he
hadn’t fired him already. He’d hit a losing streak and
had to draw all the money out of the savingsaccount.
When he went down to the station to meet Joe he had a
terrible head and only a dime in his pocket. The night
before they’d cleaned him out at red dog.
    Joe looked the same as ever only he was thinner and
 his mustache was longer. ^Well, how’s tricks?’^ Charley
 cook Joe’s other bag as they walked up the platform.
    ^^Troubled with low ceilin’s, air full of holes.”
         86

1002
   *^^1 bet it is. Say, you look like youM been hitting it up,
Charley. I hope you’re ready to get to work.”
   ^^Sure. All depends on gettin’ the right C.O.  .  . . Ain’t
I been to nightschool every night?”
        bet you have.”
   ^^How are you feelin’ now, Joe^^”
   ^^Oh, Pm all right now. I just about fretted myself
into a nuthouse. What a lousy summer I’ve had.        . . .
What have you been up to, you big bum?”
   ^Well, I’ve been gatherin’ information about the theory
of the straight flush. And women . . . have I learned
about women Say, how’s the wife and kids?”
    “Fine. . . . You’ll meet ’em. I’m goin’ to take an
apartment here this winter.  . . . Well, boy, it’s a case of
up and at ’em. We are goin’ in with Andy Merritt. . . *
You’ll meet him this noon. Where can I get a room?”
“Well, I’m stayin’ at that kind of glorified Y over on
Thirtyeighth Street.” “That’s all right.”
    When they got into the taxi, Joe tapped him on the
knee and leaned over and asked with a grin, “When are
you ready to start to manufacture?” “Tomorrow mornin’
at eight o’clock. Old Bigelow just failed over in Long
Island City. I seen his shop. Wouldn’t cost much to get

it in shape.”
    “We’ll go over there this afternoon. He might take a
little stock.”
    Charley shook his head. “That stock’s goin’ to be worth
                             give him cash or notes or anythin’. He’s
money, Joe * . ,
a halfwit anyway. Last time I went over there it was to
try to get a job as a mechanic. . . . Jeez, I hope those
days are over. . . , The trouble with me is, Joe, I want
to get married and to get married like I want I got to
have beaucoup kale. . . . Believe it or not, I’m in love.”
    “With the entire chorus at the Follies, I’ll bet. . . .

That’s a hot one . . . you want to get married.” Joe
laughed like he’d split. While Joe went up to his room

                                                                                87

1003
to clean up, Charley went round to the corner drugstore

to get himself a bromoseltzer.
    They had lunch with Merritt, who turned out to be a
greyfaced young man with a square jaw, at the Yale Club.
Charley still had a pounding headache and felt groggily

that he wasn’t making much of an impression. He kept his
mouth shut and let Joe do the talking. Joe and Merritt
talked Washington and War Department and Navy De-
partment and figures that made Charley feel he ought to
be pinching himself to see if he was awake.
    After lunch Merritt drove them out to Long Island
City in an open Pierce Arrow touringcar. When they actu-

ally got to the plant, walking through the long littered
rooms looking at lathes and electric motors and stamping
and dyemaking machines, Charley felt he knew his way
around better. He took out a piece of paper and started
 making notes. As that seemed to go big with Merritt he
 made a lot more notes. Then Joe started making notes

 too. When Merritt took out a little book and started mak-
ing notes himself, Charley knew he’d done the right thing.
     They had dinner with Merritt and spent the evening

 tvith him. It was heavy sledding because Merritt was one
 of those people who could size a man up at a glance, and
 he was trying to size up Charley. They ate at an expensive
 French speakeasy and sat there a long time afterwards
 drinking cognac and soda. Merritt was a great one for
 writing lists of officers and salaries and words like capitali-
 zation, depreciation, amortization down on pieces of paper,
 all of them followed by big figures with plenty of zeros.
 The upshot of it seemed to be that Charley Anderson
 would be earning two hundred and fifty a week (payable
 in preferred stock) starting last Monday as supervising
  engineer and that the question of the percentage of capital
  stock he and Joe would have for their patents would be
  decided at a meeting of the board of directors next day.
  The top of Charley’s head was floating. His tongue was

           88

1004
a little thick from the cognac. All he could think of saying,
and he kept saying it, was, “Boys, we mustn’t go off half-
cocked.”
   When he and Joe finally got Merritt and his Pierce
Arrow back to the Yale Club they heaved a deep breath.
“Say, Joe, is that bird a financial wizard or is he a nut?
He talks like greenbacks grew on trees.”
    “He makes ’em grow there. Honestly . . .” Joe Askew
took his arm and his voice sunk to a whisper, “that bird

is going to be the Durant of aviation financing.” “He
don’t seem to know a Liberty motor from the hind end
of a blimp.” “He knows the Secretary of the Interior,
which is a hell of a lot more important.”
    Charley got to laughing so he couldn’t stop. All the way
back to the Chatterton House he kept bumping into peo-
ple walking along the street. His eyes were full of tears.
He laughed and laughed. When they went to the desk
to ask for their mail and saw the long pale face of the
clerk Charley nudged Joe. “Well, it’s our last night in

this funeral parlor.”
    The hallway to their rooms smelt of old sneakers and
showers and lockerrooms. Charley got to laughing again.
He sat on his bed a long time giggling to himself. “Jesus
this is more like itj this is better than Paree.” After Joe
had gone to bed Charley stuck his head in the door still
giggling. “Rub me, Joe,” he yelled. “I’m lucky.”
    Next morning they went and ate their breakfast at the
Belmont. Then Joe made Charley go to Knox’s and buy
 him a derby before they went downtown. Charley’s hair
 was a little too wiry for the derby to set well, but the band
 had an expensive englishleathery smell. He kept taking

 it off and sniffing it on the way downtown in the subway.
 “Say, Joe, when my first paycheck comes I want you to
 take me round and get me outfitted m a soup an’ fish. . .  .

 This girl, she likes a feller to dress up.” “You won’t be
 out of overalls, boy,” growled Joe Askew, “night or day

                                                                                 89

1005
for dx months if I have anything to say about it. We’ll
have to live in that plant if we expect the product to be
halfway decent, don’t fool yourself about that.” ^^Sure, Joe,
sure, I was only kiddm’.”
   They met at the office of a lawyer named Lilienthal.
From the minute they gave their names to the elegantly-
upholstered blonde at the desk Charley could feel the ex-
citement of a deal in the air. The blonde smiled and bowed
into the receiver. “Oh, yes, of course. . . . Mr. Anderson
and Mr, Askew.” A scrawny officeboy showed them at once
into the library, a dark long room filled with calfbound
lawbooks. They hadn’t had time to sit down before Mr,
Lilienthal himself appeared through a groundglass door.
He was a dark oval neckless man with a jaunty manner.
^Well, here’s our pair of aces right on time.” When Joe
introduced them he held Charley’s hand for a moment in
the smooth fat palm of his small hand. “Andy Merritt
has just been singing your praises, young fellah, he says
you are the coming contactman.” “And here I was just
telling him I wouldn’t let him out of the factory for six
months. He’s the bird who’s got the feel for the motors.”
“Well, maybe he meant you birdmen’s kind of contact,”
said Mr. Lilienthal, lifting one thin black eyebrow.
    The lawyer ushered them into a big office with a big
empty mahogany desk in the middle of it and a blue
Chinese rug on the floor. Merritt and two other men were
ahead of them. To Charley they looked like a Kuppen-
heimer ad standing there amid the blue crinkly cigarette-
smoke in their neatlycut dark suits with the bright grey
light coming through the window behind them. George
Hollis was a pale young man with his hair parted in the
middle and the other was a lanky darkfaced Irish lawyer
named Burke, who was an old friend of Joe Askew’s and
would put their patents through Washington for them,
Joe explained. They all seemed to think Charley was a
         90

1006
great guy, but he was telling himself all the time to keep
his mouth shut and let Joe do the talking.
    They sat round that lawyer^s mahogany desk all morn-
ing smoking cigars and cigarettes and spoiling a great deal
of yellow scratchpaper until the desk looked like the bot-
tom of an uncleaned birdcage and the Luckies tasted sour
on Charley^s tongue. Mr. Lllienthal was all the time call-
ing in his stenographerj a little mouselike girl with big
grey eyes, to take notes and then sending her out again.
Occasionally the phone buzzed and each time he answered

it in his bored voice, “My dear young lady, hasn’t it oc-
curred to you that I might be in conference?”
    The concern was going to be called the Askew-Merritt
Company. There was a great deal of talk about what state
to incorporate in and how the stock was to be sold, how it
was going to be listed, how it was going to be divided.
When they finally got up to go to lunch it was already
two o’clock and Charley’s head was swimming. Several of
them went to the men’s room on their way to the elevator
and Charley managed to get Into the urinal beside Joe
and to whisper to him, ^^Say, for crissake, Joe, are we
rookin’ those guys or are they rookin’ us?” Joe wouldn’t
answer. All he did was to screw his face up and shrug his

shoulders.



                                                               NEWSREEL L


                        DonH blame It all on Broadway

         with few exceptions the management of our government
has been and is in honest and competent hands, that the finances

are sound and well managed, and that the business interests of

the nation, including the owners, managers and employees, are

representative      honorable and patriotic motives and that the

                                                                                         91

1007
present economic condition warrants a continuation of con«
fidence and prosperity

        You have oursel] to blame
            Donh shame the name of dear old Broadway

  GRAND JURY WILL QUIZ BALLPLAYERS

       IMPROVED LUBRICATWG SYSTEM THAT INSURES
POSITIVE AND CONSTANT OILING OVER THE ENTIRE
BEARING SURFACES

             Tve got a longirP way down in my heart
                 For that old gang that has drifted afart

        the Dooling Shipbuilding Corporation has not paid or
agreed to pay and will not pay, directly or indirectly, any bribe
of any sort or description to any employee or representative of
the U.S. Shipping Board, the Emergency Fleet Corporation
or anv other government agency

                   SLAIN RICH MAN BURIED IN CELLAK

             I canh forget that old quartette
                 That sang Sweet Adelme
             Goodby forever old fellows and gals
                 Goodby forever old sweethearts and fals

NEWLY DESIGNED GEARS AFFORDING NOT
              ONLY GREATER STRENGTH AND LONGER
                                 LIFE BUT INCREASED SMOOTHNESS
NEW CLUTCH—AN ENGINEERING ACHIEVEMENT
          THAT ADDS WONDERFUL POSITIVENESS TO
                          POWER TRANSMISSION THAT MAKES
                                GEARSHIFTING EASY AND NOISELESS

NEW AND LARGER BULLET LAMPS AFFORD THE
                        MOST PERFECT ILLUMINATION EVER
                                               DEVELOPED FOR MOTOR USE

 GARY CALLS ROMANTIC PUBLIC RESPON-^
               SIBLE FOR EIGHT HOUR DAY
          92

1008
       the prices obtained for packing house products were the

results of purely economic laws. Official figures prove that if
wheat prices are to respond to the law of supply and demand

                  PIGIRON OUTPUT SHARPLY CURBED

        And if you should be dtnmg with a httle strariger
            Red lights seem to warn you of a danger
                Donh blame it all on Broadway



                                     THE BITTER DRINK

         Veblen,
         a greyfaced shambling man lolling resentful at his

 desk with his cheek on his hand, in a low sarcastic
 mumble of intricate phrases subtly paying out the logi-

 cal inescapable rope of matteroffact for a society to hang

 itself by,
          dissecting out the century with a scalpel so keen,

  so comical, so exact that the professors and students
  mnetenths of the time didn’t know it was there, and

  the magnates and the respected windbags and the ap-
  plauded loudspeakers never knew it was there.
          Veblen
          asked too many questions, suffered from a consti-

  tutional inability to say yes.

           Socrates asked questions, drank down the bitter

  drink one night when the first cock crowed,

           but Veblen
           drank it in little sips through a long life in the

   stuffiness of classrooms, the dust of libraries, the stale-

   ness of cheap flats such as a poor instructor can afford.
   He fought the boyg all right, pedantry, routine, time-

   servers at office desks, trustees, collegepresidents, the

   plump flunkies of the ruling businessmen, all the good

                                                                                   91

1009
jobs kept for yesmen, never enough money, every
broadening hope thwarted. Veblen drank the bitter
drink all right.



        The Veblens were a family of freeholding farmers.
        The freeholders of the narrow Norwegian valleys
were a stubborn hardworking people, farmers, dairy-
men, fishermen, rooted in their fathers’ stony fields, in
their old timbered farmsteads with carved gables they
took their names from, in the upland pastures where
they grazed the stock m summer.
        During the early nineteenth century the towns
grewj Norway filled up with landless men, storekeep-
ers, sheriffs, moneylenders, bailiffs, notaries in black
with stiff collars and briefcases full of foreclosures un-
der their arms. Industries were coming in. The tovms-
men were beginning to get profits out of the country
and to finagle the farmers out of the freedom of their
narrow farms.
        The meanspirited submitted as tenants, daylabor-
ersj but the strong men went out of the country
        as their fathers had gone out of the country cen-
turies before when Harald the Fairhaired and St. Olaf
hacked to pieces the liberties of the northern men, who
had been each man lord of his own creek, to make
Christians and serfs of them,
        only in the old days it was Iceland, Greenland,
                                                                          now it was
Vineland the northmen had sailed west to 5
America.
        Both Thorstein Veblen’s father’s people and his
mother’s people had lost their farmsteads and with
them the names that denoted them free men.
        Thomas Anderson for a while tried to make his
living as a traveling carpienter and cabinetmaker, but in
 r 847 he and his wife, Kari Thorsteinsdatter, crossed in
         94

1010
                                                                          oin friends
a whalingship from Bremen and went out to j
in the Scandihoovian colonies round Milwaukee.
        Next year his brother Haldor joined him.
                                                       in another year they
        Th^y were hard workers 5
had saved up money to preempt a claim on 160 acres of
uncleared land in Sheboygan County, Wisconsin; when
they’d gotten that land part clearecl they sold it and
moved to an all-Norway colony in Manitowoc County,
near Cato and a place named Valders after the valley
they had all come from in the old country;
        there in the house Thomas Anderson built with
his own tools, the sixth of twelve children, Thorstein
Veblen was born.
        When Thorstein was eight years old, Thomas
Anderson moved west again into the blacksoil prairies
of Minnesota that the Sioux and the buffalo had only
been driven off from a few years before. In the deed
to the new farm Thomas Anderson took back the old
farmstead name of Veblen.


         He was a solid farmer, builder, a clever carpenter,
the first man to import merino sheep and a mechanical
reaper and binder; he was a man of standing in the
group of Norway people farming the edge of the prai-
rie, who kept their dialects, the manner of life of their
narrow Norway valleys, their Lutheran pastors, their
homemade clothes and cheese and bread, their sus-
picion and stubborn dislike of townsmen’s ways.
         The townspeople were Yankees mostly, smart to
make two dollars grow where a dollar grew before,
storekeepers, middlemen, speculators, moneylenders,
with long heads for politics and mortgages; they
despised the Scandihoovian dirtfarmers they lived off,
whose daughters did their wives’ kitchenwork.
         The Norway people believed as their fathers had

                                                                                95

1011
believed that there were only two callings for an honest
man, farming or preaching.



        Thorstein grew up a hulking lad with a reputation
for laziness and wit. He hated the irk of everrepeated
backbreaking chores round the farm. Reading he was
happy. Carpentering he liked or running farmmachin-
ery. The Lutheran pastors who came to the house no-
ticed that his supple mind slid easily round the corners
of their theology. It was hard to get farmwork out of
him, he had a stinging tongue and was famous for the
                                                        his father decided to
funny names he called people j
make a preacher out of him.
        When he was seventeen he was sent for out of
the field where he was working. His bag was already
packed. The horses were hitched up. He was being
sent to Carleton Academy in Northfield, to prepare for
Carleton College.
        As there were several young Veblens to be edu-
cated their father built them a house on a lot near the
campus. Their food and clothes were sent to them from
the farm. Cash money was something they never saw.



         Thoj stein spoke English with an accent. He had a
constitutional inability to say yes. His mind was formed
 on the b'lorse sagas and on the matteroffact sense of his
 father’s farming and the exact needs of carpenterwork
 and thi eshingmachines.
         tie could never take much interest in the theology,
 sociology, economics of Carleton College where they
 were busy trimming down the jagged dogmas of the
 old Hew England bibletaught traders to make stencils
 to Inng on the walls of commissionmerchants’ offices.
          96

1012
        Veblen’s collegeyears were the years when Dar-
win’s assertions of growth and becoming were breaking
the set molds of the Noah’s Ark world,
        when Ibsen’s women were tearing down the por-
tieres of the Victorian parlors,
        and Marx’.'; mighty machine was rigging the count-
inghouse’s own logic to destroy the countinghouse.
        When Veblen went home to the farm he talked
about these things with his father, following him up and
down at his plowing, starting an argument while they
were waiting for a new load for the wheatthresher.
Thomas Anderson had seen Norway and America; he
had the squarebuilt mind of a carpenter and builder,
and an understanding of tools and the treasured elab-
orated builtupseasonbyseason knowledge of a careful
farmer,
        a tough whetstone for the sharpening steel of
young Thorstein’s wits.



        At Carleton College young Veblen was considered
a brilliant unsound eccentric; nobody could understand
why a boy of such attainments wouldn’t settle down to
the business of the day, which was to buttress property
and profits with anything usable in the debris of Chris-
tian ethics and eighteenthcentury economics that clut-
tered the minds of collegeprofessors, and to reinforce
the sacred, already shaky edifice with the new strong
girderwork of science Herbert Spencer was throwing
up for the benefit of the bosses.
        People complained they never knew whether
Veblen was joking or serious.



        In 1880 Thorstein Veblen started to try to make
his living by teaching. A year in an academy at Madi

                                                                               97

1013
son, Wisconsin, wasn’t much of a success. Next year he
and his brother Andrew started graduate work at Johns
Hopkins. Johns Hopkins didn’t suit, but boarding in
in old Baltimore house with some ruined gentlewomen
gave him a disdaining glimpse of an etiquette moth-
eaten now but handed down through the lavish leisure
of the slaveowning planters’ mansions straight from the
merry England of the landlord cavaliers.
         (The valleyfarmers had always been scornful of
outlanders’ ways.)
         He was more at home at Yale where in Noah
Porter he found a New England roundhead granite
against which his Norway granite rang in clear dissent.
He took his Ph.D. there. But there was still some ques-
tion as to what department of the academic world he
could best make a living in.
         He read Kant and wrote orize essays. But he
couldn’t get a job. Try as he couid ne couldn’t get his
mouth round the essential yes.
         He went back to Minnesota with a certain intoler-
 ant knowledge of the amenities of the higher learning.
 To his slight Norwegian accent he’d added the broad a.



         At home he loafed about the farm and tinkered
 with inventions of new machinery and read and talked
 theology and philosophy with his father. In the Scan-
 dihoovian colonies the price of wheat and the belief in
 God and St. Olaf were going down together. The
 farmers of the Northwest were starting their long losing

 fight against the parasite businessmen who were sucking
 them dry. There was a mortgage on the farm, interest
 on debts to pay, always fertilizer, new machines to buy
 to speed production to pump in a halfcentury the wealth
  out of the soil laid down in a million years of bufFalo-

          98

1014
grass. His brothers kept grumbling about this sardonic
loafer who wouldn’t earn his keep.
        Back home he met again his college sweetheart,
Ellen Rolfe, the niece of the president of Carleton
College, a girl who had railroadmagnates and money in
the family. People in Northfield were shocked when it
came out that she was going to marry the drawling
pernickety bookish badlydressed young Norwegian
ne’erdowell.
         Her family hatched a plan to get him a job as
economist for the Santa Fe Railroad but at the wrong
moment Ellen Rolfe’s uncle lost control of the line.
The young couple went to live at Stacyville where they
did everything but earn a living. They read Latin and
Greek and botanized in the woods and along the fences
and in the roadside scrub. They boated on the river and
Veblen started his translation of the 'Laxdaelasaga.
They read Lookmg Backimrd and articles by Henry
 George. They looked at their world from the outside



         In ’91 Veblen got together some money to go to
 Cornell to do postgraduate work. He turned up there
 in the office of the head of the economics department
 wearing a coonskin cap and grey corduroy trousers and
 said in his low sarcastic drawl, “I am Thorstein Veblen,”
         but it was not until several years later, after he was
 established at the new University of Chicago that had
 grown up next to the World’s Fair, and had published
 The Theory of the Leisure Class, put on the map by
 Howells’ famous review, that the world of the higher
 learning knew who Thorstein Veblen was.
          Even in Chicago as the brilliant young economist
 he lived pioneerfashion. (The valleyfarmers had always
 been scornful of outlanders’ ways.) He kept his books

 in. packingcases laid on their sides along the walls. Hk
                                                                                 99

1015
only extravagances were the Russian cigarettes he
smoked and the red sash he sometimes sported. He was
a man without Smalltalk. When he lectured he put his
cheek on his hand and mumbled out his long spiral
sentences, reiterative like the eddas. His language was
a mixture of mechanics’ terms, scientific latmity, slang
and Roget’s Thesaurus. The other profs couldn’t imag-
ine why the girls fell for him so.
        The girls fell for him so that Ellen Rolfe kept
leaving him. He’d take summer trips abroad without
his wife. There was a scandal about a girl on an ocean
liner.
        Tongues wagged so (Veblen was a man who never
explained, who never could get his tongue around the
essential yes, the valleyfarmers had always been scorn-
ful of the outlanders’ ways, and their opinions) that his
wife left him and went off to live alone on a timber-
claim in Idaho and the president asked for his resigna-
tion.
        Veblen went out to Idaho to get Ellen Rolfe to
go with him to California when he succeeded in get-
ting a job at a better salary at Leland Stanford, but in
Palo Alto It was the same story as in Chicago. He suf-
fered from woman trouble and the constitutional in-
ability to say yes and an unnatural tendency to feel
with the workingclass instead of with the profittakers.
There were the same complaints that his courses were
not constructive or attractive to big money bequests and
didn’t help his students to butter their bread, make
Phi Beta Kappa, pick plums off the hierarchies of the
academic grove. His wife left him for good. He wrote
to a friend: “The president doesn’t approve of my
domestic arrangements} nor do I.”
         Talking about it he once said, “What is one to
do if the woman moves in on you?”
         He went back up to the shack in the Idaho woods.
         100

1016
        Friends tried to get him an appointment to make
studies in Crete, a chair at the University of Pekin, but
always the boyg, routine, businessmen's flunkeys in all
the university offices   ,  .  . for the questioner the bitter
drink.



        His friend Davenport got him an appointment at
the University of Missouri. At Columbia he lived like
a hermit in the basement of the Davenports^ house,
helped with the work round the place, carpentered him-
seJf a table and chairs He was already a bitter elderly
man with a grey face covered with a net of fine wrinkles,
a Vandyke beard and yellow teeth. Few students could
follow his courses. The college authorities were often
surprised and somewhat chagrined that when visitors
came from Europe it was always Veblen they wanted
to meet.
         These were the years he did most of his writing,
 trying out his ideas on his students, writing slowly at
 night in violet ink with a pen of his own designing.
 Whenever he published a book he had to put up a
 guarantee with the publishers. In The Theory of Busi-
 ness Enterfrue^ The Instinct of Worhnanship^ The
 Vested Interests and the Convmon Man^
         he established a new diagram of a society domi-
 nated by monopoly capital,
         etched in irony
         the sabotage of production by business,
          the sabotage of life by blind need for money
 profits,
          pointed out the alternatives, a warlike society
 strangled by the bureaucracies of the monopolies forced
 by the law of diminishing returns to grind down more
 and more the common man for profits,
          or a new matteroffact commonsense society domi
                                                                                lOI

1017
nated by the needs of the men and women who did the
work and the incredibly vast possibilities for peace and
plenty offered by the progress of technology.



        These were the years of Debs’s speeches, growing
laborunions, the I.W.W. talk about industrial democ-
racy: these years Veblen still held to the hope that the
workingclass would take over the machine of produc-
tion before monopoly had pushed the western nations
down into the dark again.


        War cut across all that: under the cover of the
bunting of Woodrow Wilson’s phrases the monopolies
cracked down. American democracy was crushed.
        The war at least offered Veblen an opportunity to
break out of the airless greenhouse of academic life.
He was offered a job with the Food Administration,
he sent the Navy Department a device for catching sub-
marines by trailing lengths of stout bindingwire.
 (Meanwhile the government found his books somewhat
confusing. The postoffice was forbidding the mails to
Imferid Germany and the Industrial Revolution while
propaganda agencies were sending it out to make people
hate the Huns. Educators were denouncing The Na-
ture of Peace while Washington experts were clipping
phrases out of it to add to the Wilsonian smokescreen.)
         For the Food Administration Thorstein Veblen
wrote two reports: in one he advocated granting the
 demands of the I.W.W. as a wartime measure and con-
 ciliating the workingclass instead of beating up and
                                                     in the other he pointed
 jailing all the honest leaders j
 out that the Food Administration was a businessman’s
 racket and was not aiming for the most efficient or-
 ganization of the country as a producing machine. He
          107.

1018
suggested that, in the interests of the efficient prosecu-
tion of the war, the government step into the place of
the middleman and furnish necessities to the farmers
direct in return for raw materials 5
        but cutting out business was not at all the Admin-
istration’s idea of making the world safe for democracy,
        so Veblen had to resign from the Food Adminis-
tration.
        He signed the protests against the trial of the
hundred and one wobblies in Chicago.



        After the armistice he went to New York. In spite
of all the oppression of the war years, the air was fresh-
ening. In Russia the great storm of revolt had broken,
seemed to be sweeping west, in the strong gusts from
the new world in the east the warsodden multitudes
began to see again. At Versailles allies and enemies,
magnates, generals, flunkey politicians were slamming
the shutters against the storm, against the new, against
hope. It was suddenly clear for a second in the thun-
dering glare what war was about, what peace was about.
         In America, in Europe, the old men won. The
bankers in their offices took a deep breath, the be-
diamonded old ladies of the leisure class went back to
clipping their coupons in the refined quiet of their safe-
deposit vaults,
        the last puffs of the ozone of revolt went stale
         in the whisper of speakeasy arguments.



         Veblen wrote for the Dial,
         lectured at the New School for Social Research.
         He still had a hope that the engineers, the tech-
nicians, the nonprofiteers whose hands were on the
switchboard might take up the fight where the work'
                                                                              103

1019
ingclass had failed. He helped form the Technical
Mliance. His last hope was the British general strike.
        Was there no group of men bold enough to take
charge of the magnificent machine before the pigeyed
speculators and the yesmen at office desks irrevocably
ruined it
        and with it the hopes of four hundred years?


        No one went to Veblen’s lectures at the New
School. With every article he wrote in the Dial the
circulation dropped.
        Harding^s normalcy, the new era was beginning,
        even Veblen made a small killing on the stock-
market.
        He was an old man and lonely.
        His second wife had gone to a sanitarium suffer-
ing from delusions of persecution.
        There seemed no place for a masterless man.



        Veblen went back out to Palo Alto
        to live in his shack in the tawny hills and observe
from outside the last grabbing urges of the profit sys-
tem taking on, as he put it, the systematized delusions
of dementia praecox.
        There he finished his translation of the Laxdaela-
saga.


        He W’’as an old man. He was much alone. He let
the woodrats take what they wanted from his larder. A
skunk that hung round the shack was so tame he^d
rub up against Vebleffis leg like a cat.
        He told a friend heM sometimes hear in the still-
ness about him the voices of his boyhood talking Nor-
         104

1020
wegian as clear as on the farm In Minnesota where he
was raised. His friends found him harder than ever to
talk to, harder than ever to interest in anything. He
was running down. The last sips of the bitter drink.
        He died on August 3, 1929.
        Among his papers a penciled note was found:
        It is also my wish^ in case of deaths to be cremated

if it ccm conveniently he doney as expeditiously and in-
expensively as may hcy without ritual or ceremony of
any kind; that my ashes he thrown loose into the sea
or into some sizable stream rimning into the sea; that
no tomhstoney slahy epitaphy effigyy tahlety inscription or
monument of any name or naturey he set up to my mem-
ory or name in any place or at any time; that no obit-
uaryy memorialy portrait or biography of mcy nor any
letters written to or by me he printed or puhlishedy or
in any way reproducedy copied or circulated;
        but his memorial remains
         riveted Into the language:
        the sharp clear prism of his mind.



                                                       NEWSREEL LI


                    The sunshine drifted from our alley

                      HELP wanted: advancement

        positions that offer quick, accurate, experienced, well-
recommended young girls and young women . . . good
chance for advancement

                                Ever since the day
                                Sally went away

                              GIRLS GIRLS GIRLS
                                                                               lOS

1021
          canvassers  .   .  . caretakers .       .   . cashiers . .       . chamber-
maids . . . waitresses . .             . cleaners ... file                   clerks .     . .
companions    .  .   . comptometer operators .           .  . collection cor-
respondents   .   .   . cooks . .       . dictaphone operators        .   .  . gen-
tlewomen .      .   . multigraph operators          .  . . Elliott Fisher op-
                                                                                                          glove
erators .     .   . bill and entry clerks .            .  . gummers      .   .   .
                        governesses . . . hairdressers . . . models                  . . .
buyers .     . ,
good opportunity for stylish young ladies                       . . . intelligent
young women

                        Went down to St, James Infirmary
                        Saw my baby there
                        All stretched out on a table
                        So falcy so coldy so fair

                        Went uf to see the doctor

                 WE HAVE HUNDREDS OF POSITIONS OPEN

         we are anxious to fill vacancies, we offer good salaries,
commissions, bonuses, prizes, business opportunities, training,
advancement, educational opportunities, hospital service                 .   . .
restroom and lunchroom where excellent lunch is served at less

*‘han cost
                        Let her go let her go God bless her
                        Wherever she may be
                        She may roam this wide world over
                        Sh^ll never find a sweet man like me




                                                                MARY FRENCH


     Poor Daddy never did get tucked away in bed right
after supper the way he liked with his readinglight over
 his left shoulder and his glasses on and the paper in his
 hand and a fresh cigar in his mouth that the phone didn’t
 ring, or else it would be a knocking at the back door and
 Mother would send little Mary to open it and she’d find

            io6

1022
a miner standing there whitefaced with his eyelashes and
eyebrows very black from the coaldust saying, ^^Doc
French, pliz .    . , heem coma queek,^^ and poor Daddy
would get up out of bed yawning in hiS pyjamas and bath-
robe and push his untidy grey hair off his forehead and
tell Mary to go get his instrumentcase out of the office for
him, and be off tying his necktie as he went, and half the
time he^d be gone all night.
    Mealtimes it was worse. They never seemed to get set-
tled at the table for a meal, the three of them, without
that awful phone ringing. Daddy would go and Maiy and
Mother would sit there finishing the meal alone, sitting
there without saying anything, little Mary with her legs
wrapped around the chairlegs staring at the picture of two
dead wild ducks in the middle of the gmgercolored wall-
paper above Mother’s trim black head. Then Mother
would put away the dishes and clatter around the house
muttering to herself that if poor Daddy ever took half
the trouble with his paying patients that he did with those
miserable foreigners and miners he would be a rich man
today and she wouldn’t be killing herself with housework.
Mary hated to hear Mother talk against Daddy the w^ay
she did.
    Poor Daddy and Mother didn’t get along. Mary barely
remembered a time when she was very very small when

it had been different and they’d lived in Denver in a sunny
house with flowering bushes in the yard. That was before
Brother was taken and Daddy lost that money in the in-
vestment. Whenever anybody said Denver it made her
think of sunny. Now they lived in Trinidad where every-
thing was black like coal, the scrawny hills tall, darkening
the valley full of rows of sooty shanties, the minetippies,
the miners most of them greasers and hunkies and the
 awful saloons and the choky smeltersmoke and the little
 black trains. In Denver it was sunny, and white people
 lived there, real clean American children like Brother who

                                                                               107

1023
was taken and Mother said if poor Daddy cared for his
own flesh and blood the way he cared for those miserable
foreigners and miners Brother's life might have been
saved. Mother had made her go into the parlor, she was
so scared, but Mother held her hand so tight it hurt ter-
ribly but nobody paid any attention, they all thought it
was on account of Brother she was crying, and Mother
made her look at him in the cofiin under the glass.
   After the funeral Mother was very sick and had a night
and a day nurse and they wouldn’t let Mary see her and
Mary had to play by herself all alone in the yard. When
Mother got well she and poor Daddy didn’t get along
and always slept in separate rooms and Mary slept in the
little hallroom between them. Poor Daddy got grey and
worried and never laughed round the house any more
after that and then it was all about the investment and
they moved to Trinidad and Mother wouldn’t let her play
with the minechildren and when she came back from
school she had nits in her hair.
    Maiy had to wear glasses and was good at her studies
and was ready to go to highschool at twelve. When she
wasn’t studying she read all the books in the house. “The
child will ruin her eyes,” Mother would say to poor Daddy
across the breakfast table when he would come down with
 his eyes puffy from lack of sleep and would have to hurry
through his breakfast to be off in time to make his calls.
 The spring Mary finished the eighth grade and won the
 prizes in French and American history and English, Miss
 Parsons came around specially to call on Mrs. French to
 tell her what a good student little Mary French was and
 such a comfort to the teachers after all the miserable igno-
 rant foreigners she had to put up with. “My dear,” Mother
 said, “don’t think I don’t know how it is.” Then suddenly
 she said, “Miss Parsons, don’t tell anybody but we’re go-
 ing to move to Colorado Spnngs next fall.”
     Miss Parsons sighed. “Well, Mrs. French, we’ll hate
          io8

1024
to lose you but it certainly is best for the child. There's a
better element in the schools there.” Miss Parsons lifted
her teacup with her little finger crooked and let it down
again with a dry click in the saucer.
    Mary sat watching them from the little tapestry stool by
the fireplace.      hate to admit it,” Miss Parsons went on,
^^because I was born and bred here, but Trinidad's no place
to bring up a sweet clean little American girl.”
    Granpa Wilkins had died that spring in Denver and
Mother was beneficiary of his life insurance so she carried
off things with a high hand. Poor Daddy hated to leave
Trinidad and they hardly even spoke without making
Mary go and read in the library while they quarreled over
the dirty dishes in the kitchen. Mary would sit with an old
red embossedleather Ivanhoe in her hand and listen to
their bitter wrangling voices coming through the board
partition. “You've ruined my life and now Pm not going
to let you ruin the child's,” Mother would yell in that
mean voice that made Mary feel so awful and Mary would
sit there crying over the book until she got started reading
again and after a couple of pages had forgotten everything
except the yeomen in Lincoln green and the knights on
horseback and the castles. That summer instead of going
camping in Yellowstone like Daddy had planned they
moved to Colorado Springs.
   At Colorado Springs they stayed first in a boardinghouse
and then when the furniture came they moved to the green
shingled bungalow where they were going to live that was
set way back from the red gravel road in a scrawny lawn
among tall poplartrees.
    In the long grass Mary found the scaled remains of a
croquetset. While Daddy and Mother were fussing about
the furnishings that the men were moving in from a
wagon, she ran around with a broken mallet slamming at
the old cracked balls that hardly had any paint left on
their red and green and yellow and blue bands. When

                                                                              109

1025
Daddy came out of the house looking tired and grey with
his hair untidy over his forehead she ran up to him wav-
ing the mallet and wanted him to play croquet. ^^No time
for games now,” he said.
   Mary burst out crying and he lifted her on his shoulder
and carried her round the back porch and showed her how
by climbing on the roof of the little toolhouse behind the
kitchen door you could see the mesa and beyond, behind a
tattered fringe of racing cheesecloth clouds, the blue saw-
tooth ranges piling up to the towering smooth mass of
mountains where Pikes Peak was. ^Wedl go up there
someday on the cogwheel railroad,” he said in his warm
cozy voice close to her ear. The mountains looked so far
away and the speed of the clouds made her feel dizzy.
“Just you and me,” he said, “but you mustn’t ever cry

    . it’ll make the children tease you in school, Mary.”
    In September she had to go to highschool. It was awful
going to a new school where she didn’t have any friends.
The girls seemed so welldressed and stuck up in the first-
year high. Going through the corridors hearing the other
girls talk about parties and the Country Club and sets of
tennis and summer hotels and automobiles and friends in
finishingschools in the East, Mary, with her glasses and the
band to straighten her teeth Mother had had the dentist
put on, that made her lisp a little, and her freckles and
her hair that wasn’t red or blond but just sandy, felt a
miserable foreigner like the smelly bawling miners’ kids
back in Trinidad,
    She liked the boys better. A redheaded boy grinned at
her sometimes. At least they let her alone. She did well in
her classes and thought the teachers were lovely. In Eng-
lish they read Ramona and one day Mary, scared to death
all alone, went to the cemetery to see the grave of Helen
Hunt Jackson. It was beautifully sad that spring afternoon
in Evergreen Cemetery. When she grew up, she decided,
she was going to be like Helen Hunt Jackson,
         no

1026
   They had a Swedish girl named Anna to do the house-
work and Mother and Daddy were hardly ever home
when she came back from school. Daddy had an office
downtown in a new officebuilding and Mother was always
busy with churchwork or at the library reading up for
papers she delivered at the women’s clubs. Half the time
Mary had her supper all alone reading a book or doing her
homework. Then she would go out in the kitchen and help
Anna tidy up and try to keep her from going home and
leaving her alone in the house. When she heard the front
door opening she would run out breathless. Usually it was
only Mother, but sometimes it was Daddy with his cigar
and his tired look and his clothes smelling of tobacco and
iodiform and carbolic and maybe she could get him to sit
on her bed before she went to sleep to tell her stories
about the old days and miners and prospectors and the
war between the sheepherders and the ranchers.
    At highschool Mary’s best friend was Ada Cohn whose
father was a prominent Chicago lawyer who had had to
come out for his health. Mother did everything she could
to keep her from going to the Cohns’ and used to have
mean arguments with Daddy about how it was only on
account of his being so shiftless that her only daughter
was reduced to going around with Jews and every Tom
Dick and Harry, and why didn’t he join the Country Club
and what was the use of her struggling to get a position
for him among the better element by church activities and
women’s clubs and communitychest work if he went on
being just a poor man’s doctor and was seen loafing around
with all the scum in poolrooms and worse places for all she
knew instead of woAzing up a handsome practice in a city
                                                                               wasn’t it
where there were so many wealthy sick people 5
to get away from all that sort of thing they’d left Trini-
dad? ^^But, Hilda,” Daddy would say, %e reasonable. It’s
 on account of Mary’s being a friend of the Cohns’ that
they’ve given me their practice. They are very nice kindly

                                                                               III

1027
people.’’ Mother would stare straight at him and hissed
through her teeth: ^^Oh, if you only had a tiny bit of am-
bition.”
   Mary would run away from the table in tears and throw
herself on her bed with a book and lie there listening to
their voices raised and then Daddy’s heavy slow step and
the slam of the door and the sound of him cranking the
car to start oS on his calls again. Often she lay there with
her teeth clenched wishing if Mother would only die and
leave her and Daddy living alone quietly together. A cold
shudder would go through her at the thought of how
awful it was to have thoughts like that, and she’d start
reading, hardly able to see the printed page through her
tears at first but gradually forgetting herself in the story
in the book.
    One thing that Mother and Daddy agreed about was
that they wanted Mary to go to a really good eastern col-
lege. The year before she graduated from highschool
Mary had passed all the College Board exams except solid
geometry. She was crazy to go.
    Except for a few days camping every summer with
Daddy and one summer month she spent answering the
phone and making out the cards of the patients and keep-
ing his accounts and sending out his bills at his office, she
hated it in Colorado Springs. Her only boyfriend was a
young fellow with a clubfoot named Joe Denny, the son
of a saloonkeeper in Colorado City. He was working his
way through Colorado College. He was a bitter slow-
spoken towheaded boy with a sharp jaw, a wizard in math.
 He hated liquor and John D. Rockefeller more than any-
 thing in the world. She and Joe and Ada would go out on
 picnics Sunday to the Garden of the Gods or Austin Bluffs
 or one of the canyons and read poetry together. Their
 favorites were The Houn^ of Heaven and The City of
 Dreadful Night. Joe thrilled the girls one day standing on
 a flat rock above the little fire they were frying their bacon
          II2

1028
over and reciting The Man with the Hoe, At first they
thought heM written it himself.
   When they got in, feeling sunburned and happy after a
day in the open, Mary would so wish she could take her
friends home the way Ada did. The Cohns were kind and
jolly and always asked everybody to stay to dinner in spite
of the fact that poor Mr. Cohn was a very sick man. But
Mary didn’t dare take anybody home to her house for fear
Mother would be rude to them, or that there’d be one of
those yelling matches that started up all the time between
Mother and Daddy. The summer before she went to Vas-
sar Mother and Daddy weren’t speaking at all after a ter-
rible argument when Daddy said one day at supper that
 he was going to vote for Eugene V. Debs in November.
    At Vassar the girls she knew were better dressed than
 she was and had uppity finishingschoo^ manners, but for
 the first time in her life she was popular. The instructors
 liked her because she was neat and serious and downright
 about everything and the girls said she was as homely as a
 mud fence but a darling.
     It was all spoiled the second year when Ada came to
 Vassar. Ada was her oldest friend and Mary loved her
 dearly, so she was horrified to catch herself wishing Ada
 hadn’t come. Ada had gotten so lush and Jewish and noisy,
 and her clothes were too expensive and never just right
  They roomed together and Ada bought most of Mary’s
  clothes and books for her because her allowance was so
  tiny. After Ada came Mary wasn’t popular the way she’d
  been, and the most successful girls shied off from hen
  Mary and Ada majored in sociology and said they were
  going to be socialworkers.
      When Mary was a junior Mother went to Reno and
  got a divorce from Daddy, giving intemperance and men-
  tal cruelty as the cause. It had never occurred to Mary
  that poor Daddy drank. She cried and cried when she read
  about it in a newspaper clipping marked in red pencil some

                                                                                 113

1029
nameless wellwisher sent her from Colorado Springs. She
burned the clipping in the fireplace so that Ada shouldn’t
see it, and when Ada asked her why her eyes were so red
said It was because it had made her cry to read about all
those poor soldiers being killed in the war in Europe. It
made her feel awful having told Ada a lie and she lay
awake all night worrying about it.
   The next summer the two of them got jobs doing set-
tlementwork at Hull House in Chicago. Chicago was scary
and poor Ada Cohn couldn’t keep on with the work and
went up to Michigan to have a nervous breakdown, it was
SQ awful the w^ay poor people lived and the cracked red
knuckles of the women who took in washing and the
scabby heads of the little children and the clatter and the
gritty wind on South Halstead Street and the stench of
the stockyards, but it made Mary feel like years back in
Trinidad when she was a little girl, the way she’d felt the
summer she worked in Daddy’s office.
    When she went back to Colorado Springs for two weeks
before Vassar opened she found Mother staying in style
in a small suite at the Broadmoor. Mother had inherited
a block of stocks in American Smelting and Refining when
Uncle Henry was killed in a streetcar accident in Denver,
and had an income of twenty thousand a year. She had be-
come a great bridgeplayer and was going round the coun-
try speaking at women’s clubs against votes for women.
She spoke of Daddy in a sweet cold acid voice as ^‘your
poor dear father,” and told Mary she must dress better
and stop wearing those awful spectacles. Mary wouldn’t
take any money from her mother because she said nobody
had a right to money they hadn’t earned, but she did let
her fit her out with a new tailored tweed suit and a plain
afternoondress with a lace collar and cuffs. She got along
better with her mother now, but there was always a cold
 f-^eling of strain between them.
    Mother said she didn’t know where Daddy was living,
         114.

1030
so Mary had to go down to the office to see him. The
office was dingier than she remembered it, and full of
patients, downandoutlooking people mostly, and it w^as an
hour before he could get away to take her to lunch.
    They ate perched on stools at the counter of the little
lunchroom next door. Daddy’s hair was almost white now
and his face was terribly lined and there were big grey
pouches under his eyes. Mary got a lump in her throat
every time she looked at him. ^^Oh, Daddy, you ought to
talce a rest.” “I kno^w ... I ought to get out of the alti-
tude for a while. The old pump isn’t so good as it was.”
^^Daddy, why don’t you come east at Christmas'”’ ^^Maybe
I will if I can raise the kale and get somebody to take over
my practice for a month.” She loved the deep bass of his
voice so. “It would do you so much good. . . . It’s so
long since we had a trip together.”
    It was late. There was nobody in the lunchroom except
the frozenmouthed waitress who was eating her own lunch
at a table in the back. The big tiredfaced clock over the
coffeeurn was ticking loud in the pauses of Daddy’s slow
talk.
    “I never expected to neglect my own little girl  . .
you know how it is . , . that’s what I’ve done. . . 
How’s your mother?” “Oh, Mother’s on top of the
world,” she said with a laugh that sounded tinny in her
ears. She was working to put Daddy at his ease, like a
charity case. “Oh, well, that’s all over now. ... I was
never tlie proper husband for her,” said Daddy,
    Mary felt her eyes fill with tears. “Daddy, after I’ve
graduated will you let me take over your office? That
Awful Miss Hylan is so slipshod. . . “Oh, you’ll have
hotter things to do. It’s always a surprise to me how many
 people pay their bills anyway ... I don’t pay mine.’^
 ^^Daddy, I’m going to have to take you in hand.” “I reckon
                                            your settlementwork is just
 you will^ daughter , . .

                                                                               115

1031
trainin’ for the reform of the old man, eh?” She felt her-
self blushing.
   She’d hardly settled down to being with him when he
had to rush off to see a woman who had been m labor
five days and hadn’t had her baby yet. She hated going
back to the Broadmoor and the bellhops in monkeyjackets
and the overdressed old hens sitting in the lobby. That
evening Joe Denny called up to see if he could take her
out for a drive. Mother was busy at bridge so she slipped
out without saying anything to her and met him on the
hotel porch. She had on her new dress and had taken off
her glasses and put them in her little bag. Joe was all
a blur to her but she could make out that he looked well
and prosperous and was driving a new little Ford roadster.
    ^^Why, Mary French/’ he said, ^Vhy, if you haven’t
gone and got goodlooking on me. ... I guess there’s no
chance now for a guy like me.”
    They drove slowly round the park for a while and then
he parked the car in a spot of moonlight over a culvert.
Down the little gully beyond the quakingaspens you could
see the plains dark and shimmery stretching way off to
the moonlit horizon. “How lovely,” she said. He turned
his serious face with its pointed chin to hers and said stam-
mering a little, “Mary, I’ve got to spit it out. ... I want
you and me to be engaged.  .  .  . I’m going to Cornell to
take an engineering course . .    . scholarship. . .    . When
I get out I ought to be able to make fair money inside of
a couple of years and be able to support a wife. ... It
would make me awful happy ... if you’d say maybe

. .   . if by that time .    . . there wasn’t anybody else. . .
 His voice dwindled away.
    Mary had a glimpse of the sharp serious lines of his
face in the moonlight. She couldn’t look at him.
    “Joe, I always felt we were friends like Ada and me.
It spoils everything to talk like that. . . . When I get out
 of college I want to do socialservice work and I’ve got to
          ii6

1032
take care of Daddy.  . .  . Please don’t . .  anything lik6

that makes me feel awful."’
   He held his square hand out and they shook hands sol-
emnly over the dashboard. “All right, sister, what you say
goes,” he said and drove her back to the hotel without an-
other word. She sat a long time on the porch looking out at
the September moonlight feeling awful.
    A few days later when she left to go back to school it
was Joe who drove her to the station to take the tram east
because Mother had an important committeemeeting and
Daddy had to be at the hospital. When they said goodby
and shook hands he tapped her nervously on the shoulder

a couple of times and acted like his throat was dry, but
he didn’t say anything more about getting engaged. Maiy
was so relieved.
    On the train she read Ernest Poole’s The Harbor and
reread The Jungle and lay in the pullmanberth that night

too excited to sleep, listening to the rumble of the wheels
over the rails, the clatter of crossings, the faraway spooky

wails of the locomotive, remembering the overdressed
women putting on airs in the ladies’ dressingroom who’d
 elbowed her away from the mirror and the heavyfaced
 businessmen snoring in their berths, thinking of the work

 there was to be done to make the country what it ought to

 be, the social conditions, the slums, the shanties with filthy

 tottering backhouses, the miners’ children in grimy coats

 too big for them, the overworked women stooping over

 stoves, the youngsters struggling for an education in night-

 schools, hunger and unemployment and drink, and the

 police and the lawyers and the judges always ready to take

 it out on the w’-eakj if the people in the puUmancars could

                                                                     if she sacrificed
 onlybe made to understand how it was 5
 her life, like Daddy taking care of his patients night and

 day, maybe she, like Miss Addams . * .

     She couldn’t wait to begin. She couldn’t stay in her

 berth. She got up and went and sat tingling In the empty

                                                                                117

1033
                                                                                         —





dressingroom trying to read The Promise of Americm
Life. She read a few pages but she couldn’t take in the
meaning of the words, thoughts were racing across her
mind like the tatters of cloud pouring through the pass and
across the dark bulk of the mountains at home. She got
cold and shivery and went back to her berth.
    Crossing Chicago she suddenly told the taximan to drive
her to Hull House. She had to tell Miss Addams how she

felt. But when the taxi drew up to the curb in the midst
of the familiar squalor of South Halstead Street and she
saw two girls she knew standing under the stone porch
talking, she suddenly lost her nerve and told the driver to
go on to the station.
    Back at Vassar that winter everything seemed awful.
Ada had taken up music and was studying the violin and
could think of nothing but getting down to New York for
concerts. She said she was in love with Dr. Muck of the
Boston Symphony and wouldn’t talk about the war or
pacifism or social work or anything like that. The world
outside—the submarine campaign, the war, the election
was so vivid Mary couldn’t keep her mind on her courses
or on Ada’s gabble about musical celebrities. She went to
all the lectures about current events and social conditions.
    The lecture that excited her most that winter was G. H.
Barrow’s lecture on ^Hhe Promise of Peace.” He was a
tall thin man with bushy grey hair and a red face and a
prominent adamsapple and luminous eyes that tended to
start out of his head a little. He had a little stutter and a
warm confidential manner when he talked. He seemed so
nice somehow Mary felt sure he had been a workingman.
He had red gnarled hands with long fingers and walked
up and down the room with a sinewy stride taking off and
putting on a pair of tortoiseshell glasses. After the lecture
 he was at Mr. Hardwick’s house and Mrs. Hardwick
served lemonade and cocoa and sandwiches and the girls
all gathered round and asked questions. He was shyer than
          ii8

1034
on the platform but he talked beautifully about Labor^s
faith in Mr, Wilson and how Labor would demand peace
and how the Mexican revolution (he’d just been to Mexico
and had had all sorts of adventures there) was just a be-
ginning. Labor was going to get on its feet all over the
world and start cleaning up the mess the old order had
made, not by violence but by peaceful methods, Wilsonian
methods. That night when Mary got to bed she could still

feel the taut appealing nervous tremble that came into Mr.
Barrow’s voice sometimes. It made her crazy anxious to
get out of this choky collegelife and out into the world.
She’d never known time to drag so as it did that winter.
    One slushy day of February thaw she’d gone back to
the room to change her wet overshoes between classes
when she found a yellow telegram under the door: better
 COME HOME FOR A WHILE YOUR MOTHER NOT VERY WELL.

 It was signed daddy. She was terribly worried but it was a

 relief to have an excuse to get away from college. She took
 a lot of books with her but she couldn’t read on the train.
 She sat there too hot in the greenplush pullman with a
 book on her knees, staring out at the flat snowcovered fields
 edged with tangles of bare violet trees and the billboards
 and the shanties and redbrick falsefront stores along new
 concrete highways and towns of ramshackle frame houses

 sooty with factorysmoke and the shanties and the barns
 and the outhouses slowly turning as the train bored
 through the midwest, and thought of nothing.
     Daddy met her at the station. His clothes looked even
 more rumpled than usual and he had a button off his over-

 coat. His face was full of new small fine wrinkles when he

 smiled. His eyes were redrimmed as if he hadn’t slept for

  nights.
      ^Tt’s all right, Mary,” he said.              oughtn’t to have
                                           just selfindulgence . . gettin’
  wired you to come . . .                                            .

  lonely in my old age.” He grabbed her bag from the

  porter and went on ^king as they walked out of the sta-

                                                                                119

1035
tion. “Tour mother’s goin’ along fine ... I pulled her
through.  . . . Lucky I got wind that she was sick. That
damn housephysician at the hotel would have killed her
in another day. This Spanish influenza is tricky stuff.”
    “Is it bad here. Daddy?”
    “Very. ... I want you to be very careful to avoid in-

fection. . . . Hop’ in, ni drive you out there.” He
cranked the rusty touringcar and motioned her into the
front seat, “You know how your poor mother feels about
liquor?  .  . . Well, I kept her drunk for four days.”
    He got in beside her and started, talking as he drove.
The iron cold made her feel better after the dusty choking
plushsmell of the sleeper. “She was nicer than Tve ever
known her. By God, I almost fell in love with her all over
again.  . .  . You must be very careful not to let her do too
much when she gets up  .  .  . you know how she is. , . .

It’s the relapses that kill in this business.’'
    Mary felt suddenly happy. The bare twigs of the trees
rosy and yellow and purple spread against the blue over
the broad quiet streets. There were patches of frozen snow
on the lawns. The sky was tremendously tall and full of
yellow sunlight. The cold made the little hairs in her nose
crisp.
    Out at the Broadmoor Mother was lying in her bed in
her neat sunny room with a pink bedjacket on over her
 nightgown and a lace boudoircap on her neatlycombed
black hair. She looked pale but so young and pretty and
sort of foolish that for a second Mary felt that she and
Daddy were the grownup people and Mother was their
 daughter. Right away Mother started talking happily
 about the war and the Huns and the submarine campaign
 and what could Mr. Wilson be thinking of not teaching
 those Mexicans a lesson. She was sure it wouldn’t have
                                                                             in fact she
 been like that if Mr. Hughes had been elected 5
 was sure that he had been elected legally and that the
 Democrats had stolen the election by some skulduggery or

          I no

1036
other. And that dreadful Bryan was making the country a
laughingstock. “My dear^ Bryan is a traitor and ought to
be shot.” Daddy grinned at Mary, shrugged his shoulders
and went off saying, “Now, Hilda, just stay in bed, and
please, no alcoholic excess.”
    When Daddy had gone Mother suddenly started to cry.
When Mary asked her what was the matter she wouldn't
say. “I guess it's the influenza makes me weak in the
head,” she said. “My dear, it’s only by the mercy of God
that I was spared.”
    Mary couldn’t sit all day listening to her mother go on
                                                                                  so she
about preparedness, it made her feel too miserable 5
went down to Daddy’s office next morning to see if she
could catch a glimpse of him. The waitingroom was
crowded. When she peeped into his consultmgroom she
could see at a glance that he hadn’t been to bed all night.
It turned out that Miss Hylan had gone home sick the
day before. Mary said she’d take her place but Daddy
didn’t want to let her. “Nonsense,” said Mary, “I can say
doctor’s office over the phone as well as that awful Miss
Hylan can.” He finally gave her a gauze mask and let her
stay.
    When they’d finished up the last patient they went over
to the lunchroom for something to eat. It was three o’clock.
“You’d better go out and see your mother,” he said. “I’ve
got to start on my rounds. They die awful easy from this
thing. I’ve never seen anything like it.”
    “I’ll go back and tidy up the desk first,” said Mary
firmly.
     “If anybody calls up tell them that if they think it’s the

 flu, the patient must be put right to bed, keep their feet
 warm with a hotwaterbottle and plenty of stimulants. No
 use trying to go to the hospital because there’s not a bed in
 a radius of a hundred miles.”
     Mary went back to the office and sat down at the desk.
 There seemed to be an awful lot of new patients^ on the

                                                                               121

1037
last day Miss Hylan had run out of indexcards and had
written their names on a scratchpad. They were all flu
cases. While she sat there the phone rang constantly.
Mary’s fingers were cold and she felt trembly all over
when she heard the anxious voices, men’s, w^'ornen’s, asking
for Doc French. It was five before she got away from the
office. She took the streetcar out to the Broadmoor.
    It gave her quite a turn to hear the band playing m the
casino for the teadance and to see the colored lights and
feel the quiet warmth of the hotel halls and the air of neat
luxury in her mother’s room. Mother was pretty peevish
and said what was the use of her daughter’s coming home
if she neglected her like this. had to do some things for
Daddy,” was all Mary said. Mother started talking a blue
streak about her campaign to put German women out of
the Woman’s Tuesday Lunch Club. It went on all through
supper. After supper they played cnbbage until Mother
began to feel sleepy.
   The next day Mother said she felt fine and would sit up
in a chair. Mary tried to get Daddy on the phone to see if
she ought to but there was no answer from the office. Then
she remembered that she’d said she’d be there at nine and
rushed downtown. It was eleven o’clock and the waiting-
room was full before Daddy came in. He’d evidently just
been to a barbershop to get shaved but he looked dead-
tired. ^^Oh, Daddy, I bet you haven’t been to bed,” “Sure^
I got a couple of hours in one of the interne’s rooms at the
hospital. We lost a couple of cases last night.”
   All that week Mary sat at the desk in the waitingroom
of Daddy’s office, answering the phone through the gauze
mask, telling frightened flushed men and women who sat
there feeling the aches beginning in their backs, feeling the
rising fever flush their cheeks, not to worry, that Doc
French would be right back. At five she’d knock off and
go to the hotel to eat supper and listen to her mother talk,
but Daddy’s work would be just beginning. She tried hard
         12a

1038
to get him to take a night off for sleep every other night.
^^But how can I? McGuthrie’s laid up and IVe got all his
practice to handle as well as my own. . , , This damn
epidemic can’t last indefinitely. .     . . When it lets up a
little we’ll go out to the Coast for a couple of weeks. How
about it?” He had a hacking cough and looked grey under
the eyes but he insisted he was tough and felt fine.
    Sunday morning she got downtown late because she’c?
had to go to church with Mother and found Daddy dozing
hunched up in a chair. When she came into the office he
jumped up with a guilty look and she noticed that his face
was very flushed. “Been to church, eh, you and your
mother?” he said in a curious rasping voice. “Well, I’ve
got to be gettin’ about my business.” As he went out the
door with his soft felt hat pushed far down over his eyes
it crossed Mary’s mind that perhaps he’d been drinking.
    There didn’t seem to be many calls that Sunday so she
went back home in time to take a drive with her mother
in the afternoon. Mrs. French was feeling fine and talking
about how Mary ought to make her debut next fall. “After
all, you owe it to your parents to keep up their position,
dear.” Talk like that made Mary feel sick in the pit of her
stomach. When they got back to the hotel she said she felt
tired and went to her room and lay on the bed and read
 The Theory of the Leisure Class,
    Before she went out next morning she wrote a letter to
 Miss Addams telling her about the flu epidemic and say-
 ing that she just couldn’t go back to college, with so much
 misery going on in the world, and couldn’t they get her
something to do at Hull House.? She had to feel she was
doing something real. Going downtown in the streetcar she
 felt rested and happy at having made up her mmdj at the
 ends of streets she could see the range of mountains white
 as lumps of sugar in the brilliant winter sunshine. She
 wished she was going out for a hike with Joe Denny.
 When she put her key in the office door the carbolic iodi-

1039
form alcohol reek of the doctor’s office caught her throat.
Daddy’s hat and coat were hanging on the rack. Funny,
she hadn’t noticed his car at the curb. The groundglass
door to the consultingroom was closed. She tapped on it.
^^Daddy,” she called. There was no answer. She pushed
the door open. Oh, he was asleep. He was lying on the
couch with the laprobe from the car over his knees. The
thought crossed her mind, how awful if he was dead-
drunk. She tiptoed across the room. His head was jammed
back between the pillow and the wall. His mouth had
fallen open. His face, rough with the grey stubble, was
twisted and strangled, eyes open. He was dead.
    Mary found herself going quietly to the telephone and
calling up the emergency hospital to say Dr. French had
collapsed. She was still sitting at the telephone when she
heard the ambulance bell outside. An interne in a white
coat came in. She must have fainted because she next re-
membered being taken in a big car out to the Broadmoor.
She went right to her room and locked herself in. She lay
down on her bed and began to cry. Some time in the night
she called up her mother’s room on the phone. ^Tlease,
Mother, I don’t want to see anybody. I don’t want to go
to the funeral. I want to go right back to college.”
    Mother made an awful rumpus but Mary didn’t listen
to what she said and at last next morning Mother gave
her a hundred dollars and let her go. She didn’t remember
whether ^ffie’d kissed her mother when she left or not. She
went down to the depot alone and sat two hours in the
waitingroom because the train east was late. She didn’t
feel ajxything. She seemed to be seeing things unusually
vividly, the brilliant winter day, the etched faces of people
sitting in the waitingroom, the colors on the magazines on
the newsstand. The porter came to get her for the train.
She sat in the pullman looking out at the snow, the yellow
grass, the red badlands, the wire fences, the stockcorrals
along the track standing up grey and yellowish out of the

         12.4.

1040
snow, the watertanks, the little stations, the grainelevators^.
the redfaced trainmen with their earflaps and gauntlets.
Early in the morning going through the industrial district
before Chicago she looked out at the men, young men old
men with tin dinnerpails, faces ruddy and screwed up with
the early cold, crowding the platforms w^aiting to go to
work. She looked in their faces carefully, studying their
           they were people she expected to get to know, be-
faces j
cause she was going to stay in Chicago instead of going
back to college.



                               THE CAMERA EYE (45)


        the narrow yellow room teems with talk under the

low ceiling and crinkling tendrils of cigarettesmoke twine

 blue and fade round noses behind ears under the rims oi

 women’s hats in arch looks changing arrangements of lips

 the toss of a bang the wise I-know-it wrinkles round the

 eyes all scrubbed stroked clipped scraped with the help of

 lipstick rouge shavingcream razorblades into a certain pat-

 tern that implies

         this warmvoiced woman who moves back and forth

 with a throaty laugh head tossed a little back distributing

 with teasing looks the parts in the fiveoclock drama

         every man his pigeonhole

         the personality must be kept carefully adjusted ovei

 the face

         to facilitate recognition she pins on each of us a badg€

                                                                                125

1041
       today entails tomorrow

       Thank you but why                        Inhibited? Indeed

goodby

       the old brown hat flopped faithful on the chair beside

;he door successfully snatched

        outside the clinking cocktail voices fade

        even in this elderly brick dwellinghouse made over

with green paint orange candles a little tinted calcimine into

        Greenwich Village

        the stairs go up and down

        lead through a hallway ranked with bells names evok-

ing lives tangles unclassified

        into the rainy twoway street where cabs slither slush-

ing footsteps plunk slant lights shimmer on the curve of a

wet cheek a pair of freshcolored lips a weatherlined neck

a gnarled grimed hand an old man^s bloodshot eye

        street twoway to the corner of the roaring avenue

where in the lilt of the rain and the dm the four directions

        (the salty in all of us ocean the protoplasm throbbing

through cells growing dividing sprouting into the billion

diverse not yet labeled not yet named

        always they slip through the fingers

        the changeable the multitudinous lives)

        box dizzingly the compass

1042
                                                  MARY FRENCH


    For several weeks the announcement of a lecture had
caught Mary French’s eye as she hurried past the bulletin-
board at Hull House: May 15 G. H. Barrow, Europe:
Problems of Postwar Reconstruction. The name teased her
memory but it wasn’t until she actually saw him come into
the lecturehall that she remembered that he was the nice
skinny redfaced lecturer who talked about how it was the
workmgclass that would keep the country out of war at
Vassar that winter. It was the same sincere hesitant voice
with a little stutter in the beginning of the sentences some-
times, the same informal way of stalking up and down the
lecturehall and sitting on the table beside the waterpitcher
with his legs crossed. At the reception afterwards she didn’t
let on that she’d met him before. When they were intro-
duced she was happy to be able to give him some informa-
tion he wanted about the chances exsoldiers had of finding
jobs m the Chicago area. Next morning Mary French was
all of a fluster when she was called to the phone and there
was Mr. Barrow’s voice asking her if she could spare him
an hour that afternoon as he’d been asked by Washington
to get some unoflicial information for a certain bureau.
“You see, I thought you would be able to give me the real
truth because you are in daily contact with the actual peo-
ple.” She said she’d be delighted and he said would she
meet him m the lobby of the Auditorium at five.
    At four she was up in her room curling her hair, won-
dering what dress to wear, trying to decide whether she’d
go without her glasses or not. Mr. Barrow was so nice.
    They had such an interesting talk about the employment
situation which was not at all a bright picture and when
Mr. Barrow asked her to go to supper with him at a little

Italian place he knew in the Loop she found herself say-
ing yes without a quiver in spite of the fact that she hadn’t

1043
been out to dinner with a man since she left Colorado
Springs after her father^s death three years ago. She felt
somehow that she’d known Mr. Barrow for years.

   Still she was a bit surprised at the toughlooking place
with sawdust on the floor he took her to, and that they
sold liquor there and that he seemed to expect her to drink
a cocktail. He drank several cocktails himself and ordered
red wine. She turned down the cocktails but did sip a little
of the wdne not to seem too oldfashioned. “I admit,” he
said, ^^that I’m reaching the age where I have to have a
drink to clear the work out of my head and let me relax.

.  . . That was the great thing about the other side .         . .
having wine with your meals.      .  . . They really under-
stand the art of life over there.”
    After they’d had their spumoni Mr. Barrow ordered
himself brandy and she drank the bitter black coffee and
they sat in the stuffy noisy restaurant smelly of garlic and
sour wine and tomatosauce and sawdust and forgot the
time and talked. She said she’d taken up socialservice work
to be in touch with something real but now she was be-
ginning to feel coopedup and so institutional that she often
^wondered if she wouldn’t have done better to join the Red
Cross overseas or the Friends Reconstruction Unit as so
many of the girls had but she so hated war that she didn’t
want to do anything to help even in the most peaceful
way. If she’d been a man she would have been a C.O.,
 she knew that.
     Mr. Barrow frowned and cleared his throat: “Of course
 I suppose they were sincere, but they were very much
 mistaken and probably deserved what they got.” “Do you

 still think so?” “Yes, dear girl, I do. .          .  . Now we can
                              nobody can refuse us, wages, the closed
 ask for anything j
 shop, the eighthour day. But it was hard diffenng with old
 friends . . . my attitude was much misunderstood in cer-

 tain quarters. . .

          128

1044
    ^^But you can’t think it’s right to give them these dread*
ful jail sentences.”
    ^^That’s just to scare the others. . . . You’ll see they’l’
be getting out as soon as the excitement quiets down . .
Debs’s pardon is expected any day.”
         should hope so,” said Mary.
    ^‘^Poor Debs,” said Mr. Barrow, ^^one mistake has de-
stroyed the work of a lifetime, but he has a great heart,
the greatest heart In the world.” Then he went on to tell
her about how he’d been a railroadman himself in the old
days, a freightagent in South Chicago^ they’d made him
the businessagent of his local and he had worked for the
Brotherhood, he’d had a hard time getting an education
and suddenly he’d waked up when he was more than
thirty, in New York City writing a set of articles for the
Evening Glohe^ to the fact that there was no woman in his
life and that he knew nothing of the art of life and the
sort of thing that seemed to come natural to them, over
there and ta the Mexicans now. He’d married unwisely
and gotten into trouble with a chorusgirl, and a woman
had made his life a hell for five years but new chat he’d
broken away from all that, he found himsel/ lonely get-
ting old wanting something more substantial than the little
pickups a man traveling on missions to Mexico and Italy
and France and England, little international incidents, he
called them with a thinlipped grin, that were nice affairs
enough at the time but were just dust and ashes. Of course
he didn’t believe in bourgeois morality but he wanted un-
derstanding and passionate friendship in a woman.
    When he talked he showed the tip of his tongue some-
times through the broad gap in the middle of his upper
teeth. She could see In his eyes how much he had suffered.
^^Of course I don’t believe in conventional marriage
either,” said Mary. Then Mr. Barrow broke out that she
was so fresh so young so eager so lovely so what he needed
in his life and his speech began to get a little thick an4

                                                                              129

1045
she guessed it was time she was getting back to Hull House
because she had to get up so early. When he took her home
in a taxi she sat in the furthest corner of the seat but he
was very gentlemanly although he did seem to stagger a
little when they said goodnight.
   After that supper the work at Hull House got to be
more and more of a chore^ particularly as George Barrow^ "

who was making a lecturetour all over the country in de-
fense of the President’s policies, wrote her several times a
week. She wrote him funny letters back, kidding about the
oldmaids at Hull House and saying that she felt it in her
bones that she was going to graduate from there soon, the
way she had from Vassar. Her friends at Hull House
began to say how pretty she was getting to look now that
she was curling her hair.
    For her vacation that June Mary French had been plan-
ning to go up to Michigan with the Cohns, but when the
time came she decided she really must make a breaks so
instead she took the Northland around to Cleveland and
got herself a job as countergirl in the Eureka Cafeteria on
Lakeside Avenue near the depot.
    It was pretty tough. The manager was a fat Greek who
pinched the girls’ bottoms when he passed behind them
along the counter. The girls used rouge and lipstick and
were mean to Mary, giggling in corners about their dates
or making dirty jokes with the busboys. At night she had
shooting pains in her insteps from being so long on her
feet and her head spun from the faces the asking mouths
the probing eyes jerking along in the rush hours in front of
her like beads on a string. Back in the rattly brass bed in
the big yellowbrick roominghouse, a girl she talked to on
her boat had sent her to, she couldn’t sleep or get the smell
                                                                                 she lay
of cold grease and dishwashing out of her nose 5
there scared and lonely listening to the other roomers stir-
ring behind the thin partitions, tramping to the bathroom*
slamming doors in the hall.

         130

1046
   After sheM worked two weeks at the cafeteria she de-
cided she couldn’t stand it another minute, so she gave up
the job and went and got herself a room at the uptown
Y.W.C.A. where they were very nice to her when, they
heard she’d come from Hull House and showed her a lisi
of socialservice jobs she might want to try for, buc she
said No, she had to do real work in industry fcr once^ and
took the train to Pittsburgh where she knew a sjrJ whc
was an assistant librarian at Carnegie Institute.
    She got into Pittsburgh late on a summer affernoon
Crossing the bridge she had a glimpse of the level sun-
light blooming pink and orange on a confusion of ir^etal-
colored smokes that jetted from a wilderness of chirnneya
ranked about the huge corrugated iron and girdet ^^rorlr
structures along the riverbank. Then right away she 'waf?
getting out of the daycoach into the brownish dark glooni
of the station with her suitcase cutting into her hand. She
called up her friend from a dirty phonebooth that smelled
of cigarsmoke. ‘^^Mary French, how lovely came Lois
Speyer’s comical burbling voice. ^T’ll get you a room right
here at Mrs. Gansemeyer’s, come on out to supper. It’s a
boardinghouse. Just wait till you see it. . . . But I just
can’t imagine anybody coming to Pittsburgh for their vaca-*

tion.” Mary found herself getting red and nervous right
there in the phonebooth. ^^I wanted to see something dif-
ferent from the socialworker angle.”
    ^Well, it’s so nice the idea of having somebody to talk

to that I hope it doesn’t mean you’ve lost your mind . . *
you know they don’t employ Vassar graduates in the open-
hearth furnaces.”
    ^T’m not a Vassar graduate,” Mary French shouted into
the receiver, feeling the near tears stinging her eyes.

just like any other workinggirl. . . . You ought to hav^
seen me working in that cafeteria in Cleveland.”
come on out, Mary darling. I’ll save some supper foi

                                                                               13^

1047
you/’ It was a long ride out on the streetcar. Pittsburgh
was grim all right.
    Next day she went around to the employment offices of
several of the steelcompanies. When she said she’d been
a socialworker they looked at her awful funny. Nothing
            not taking on clerical or secretarial workers now.
doing j
'She spent days with the newspapers answering helpwanted
ado.
   Lois Speyer certainly laughed in that longfaced sarcastic
way she had when Mary had to take a reporting job that
Lois had gotten her because Lois knew the girl who wrote
the society column on the Times-SentmeL
    As the Pittsburgh summer dragged into August^ hot and
thoky with coalgas and the strangling fumes from blast-
furnaces, bloomingmills, rollingmills that clogged the
^moky Y where the narrow rivervalleys came together,
fhcje began to be talk around the office about how red
agitators had gotten into the mills. A certain Mr. Gorman
sjud to be one of the head operatives for the Sherman Serv-
ice was often seen smoking a cigar in the managingeditor’s
office. The paper began to fill up with news of alien riots
and Russian Bolshevists and the nationalization of women
and the defeat of I.enin and Trotzky.
    Then one afternoon in early September Mr. Healy
called Mary French into his private office and asked her to

sit down. When he went over and closed the door tight
Mary thought for a second he was going to make indecent
proposals to her, but instead he said in his most tired
fatherly manner, ^^Now, Miss Fi-ench, I have an assign-
ment for you that I don’t want you to take unless you
really want to. I’ve got a daughter myself and I hope when
ihe grows up she’ll be a nice simple wellbroughtup girl
 like you are. So honestly if I thought It was demeaning I
wouldn’t ask you to do it . .          . you know that. We’re
 strictly the family newspaper ... we let the other fellers
 pull the rough stuff. ... You know an item never goes

         132

1048
through my desk that I don’t think of my own wife and
daughters, how would I like to have them read it.”
   Ted Healy was a large round blackhaired man with a
rolling grey eye like a codfish’s eye. ^^What’s the story
Mr. Healy?” asked Mary briskly, she’d made up hei
mind it must be something about the whiteslave traffic.
^^Well, these damned agitators, you know they’re trying to
start a strike.  , .   . Well, they’ve opened a publicity office
downtown. I’m scared to send one of the boys down .   . .
might get into some trouble with those gorillas ... I
don’t want a dead reporter on my front page. . . . But
sending you down ... You know you’re not working for
a paper, you’re a socialservice worker, want to get both
sides of the story. ... A sweet innocentlooking girl can’t
possibly come to any harm. . . . Well, I want to get the
lowdown on the people working there .     . . what part of
Russia they were born in, how they got into this country
in the first place . . . where the money comes from      . .  .

prisonrecords, you know. .   . . Get all the dope you can.

It’ll make a magnificent Sunday feature.”
    ^T’m very much interested in industrial relations . . .

it’s a wonderful assignment. . . . But, Mr. Healy, aren’t
conditions pretty bad in the mills?”
    Mr. Healy jumped to his feet and began striding up
and down the office. ^T’ve got all the dope on that. . . .
Those damn guineas are making more money than they
ever made in their lives, they buy stocks, they buy wash-
ingmachines and silk stockings for their women and they
send money back to the old folks. While our boys were
risking their lives in the trenches, they held down ail the
good jobs and most of ’em are enemy aliens at that. Those
guineas are welloff, don’t you forget it. The one thing
they can’t buy is brains. That’s how those agitators get at
’em. They talk their language and fill ’em up with a lot
 of notions about how all they need to do is stop working
and they can take possession of this country that we’vv
                                                                               H3

1049
built up into the greatest country in the world. ... I
don’t hold it against the poor devils of guineas, they’re just
ignorant^ but those reds who accept the hospitality of our
country and then go around spreading their devilish prop-
aganda . . . My god, if they were sincere I could forgive
’em, but they’re just in it for the money like anybody else.
We have absolute proof that they’re paid by Russians reds
                                                                                       and
with money and jewels they’ve stole over there j
they’re not content with that, they go around shaking
down those poor ignorant guineas . . . Well, all I can
say is shooting’s too good for ’em.” Ted Healy was red
in the face. A boy in a green eyeshade burst in with a big
bunch of flimsy. Mary French got to her feet. “I’ll get
right after it, Mr. Healy,” she said.
    She got off the car at the wrong corner and stumbled up
the uneven pavement of a steep broad cobbled street of
little gimcrack stores poolrooms barbershops and Italian
spaghettiparlors. A gusty wind whirled dust and excelsior
and old papers. Outside of an unpainted doorway foreign-
looking men stood talking in low voices in knots of three
or four. Before she could get up her nerve to go up the
long steep dirty narrow stairs she looked for a minute into
the photographer’s window below at the tinted enlarge-
ments of babies with toopink cheeks and the family groups
and the ramrodstiff bridal couples. Upstairs she paused in
the httered hall. From ofSces on both sides came a sound
of typing and arguing voices. In the dark she ran into a
young man. “Hello,” he said in a gruff voice she liked,
^^are you the lady from New York?”
    “Not exactly. Pm from Colorado.”
    “There was a lady from New York cornin’ to help us
with some publicity. I thought maybe you was her.”
    “That’s just what I came for,”
    “Come in, I’m just Gus Moscowski. I’m kinder the
ofSceboy.” He opened one of the closed doors for her into

a. small dusty office piled with stackedup papers and filled

         134

1050
up with a large table covered with clippings at which two
young men in glasses sat in their shirtsleeves. ^^Here are
the regular guys.’^ All the time she was talking to the
others she couldn^t keep her eyes off him. He had blond
closecropped hair and very blue eyes and a big bearcub
look m his cheap serge suit shiny at the elbows and knees.
The young men answered her questions so politely that she
couldn’t help telling them she was trying to do a feature
story for the Times-SentineL They laughed their heads
off. “But Mr. Healy said he wanted a fair wellrounded
picture. He just thinks the men are being misled.” Mary
found herself laughing too. “Gus,” said the older man,
“you take this young lady around and show her some of
the sights.  .  .  . After all Ted Healy may have lost his
mind. First here’s what Ted Healy’s friends did to Fanny
Sellers.” She couldn’t look at the photograph that he
poked under her nose. “What had she done^” “Tried to
organize the workingclass, that’s the worst crime you can
commit in this man’s country.”
    It was a relief to be out on the street again, huriynng
along while Gus Moscowski shambled grinning beside her.
“Well, I guess I’d better take you first to see how folks
live on fortytwo cents an hour. Too bad you can’t talk
Polish. I’m a Polack myself.” “You must have been born
in this country.” “Sure, highschool graduate. If I can get
the dough I want to take engineering at Carnegie Tech.
... I dunno why I string along with these damn Po-
lacks.” He looked her straight in the face and grinned
when he said that. She smiled back at him. “I understand
why,” she said. He made a gesture with his elbow as they
turned a corner past a group of ragged kids making mud-
pies, they were pale flabby filthy little kids with pouches
under their eyes. Mary turned her eyes away but she’d
seen them, as she’d seen the photograph of the dead
woman with her head caved in. “Git an eyeful of cesspool

                                                                              ^35

1051
alley the land of opportunity/’ Gus Moscowski said way
down in his throat.
   That night when she got off the streetcar at the corner
nearest Mrs. Gansemeyer’s her legs were trembling and
the small of her back ached. She went right up to her room
and hurried into bed. She was too tired to eat or to sit up
listening to Lois Speyer’s line of sarcastic gossip. She
couldn’t sleep. She lay in her sagging bed listening to the
voices of the boarders rocking on the porch below and to
the hooting of engines and the clank of shunted freight-
cars down in the valley^ seeing again the shapeless broken
shoes and the worn hands folded over dirty aprons and the
sharp anxious beadiness of women’s eyes, feeling the quake
underfoot of the crazy stairways zigzagging up and down
the hills black and bare as slagpiles where the steelworkers
lived in jumbled shanties and big black rows of smoke-
gnawed clapboarded houses, in her nose the stench of
cranky backhouses and kitchens with cabbage cooking and
clothes boiling and unwashed children and drying diapers.
She slept by fits and starts and would wake up with Gus
Moscowski’s warm tough voice in her head, and her whole
body tingling with the hard fuzzy bearcub feel of him
w^hen his arm brushed against her arm or he put out his
big hand to steady her at a place where the boardwalk had
broken through and she’d started to slip in the loose shaly
slide underneath. When she fell solidly asleep she went
on dreaming about him. She woke up early feeling happy
because she was going to meet him again right after break-
 fast.
    That afternoon she went back to the office to write the
piece. Just the way Ted Healy had said, she put in all she
could find out about the boys running the publicity bureau.
 The nearest to Russia any of them came from was Canar-
 sie, Long Island. She tried to get in both sides of the ques-
tion, even called them ^^possibly misguided.”
     About a minute after she’d sent it in to the Sunday edi-

          136

1052
tor she was called to the city desk. Ted Healy had on a
green eyeshade and was bent over a swirl o£ galleys. Mary
could see her copy on top of the pile of papers under his
elbow. Somebody had scrawled across the top of it in red
pencil: Why wish this on me? ^^Well, young lady/’ he said
without looking up, “you’ve written a firstrate propaganda
piece for the Nation or some other parlorpink sheet in
New York, but what the devil do you think we can do with
It? This is Pittsburgh,” He got to his feet and held out his
hand. “Goodby, Miss French, I wish I had some way of
using you because you’re a mighty smart girl .       . . and
smart girl reporters are rare.    . . . Pve sent your slip to
the cashier.  .  .       Before Mary French could get her
breath she was out on the pavement with an extra week’s
salary in her pocketbook, which after all was pretty white
of old Ted Healy.
    That night Lois Speyer looked aghast when Mary told
her she’d been fired, but when Mary told Lois that she’d
gone down and gotten a job doing publicity for the Amal-
gamated Lois burst into tears. “I said you’d lost your mind
and it’s true.    . .   . Either Pll have to move out of this
boardinghouse or you will   . . . and I won’t be able to go
around with you like Pve been doing.” “How ridiculous,
Lois.” “Darling, you don’t know Pittsburgh. I don’t care
about those miserable strikers but I absolutely have got to
 hold onto my job.     .  . . You know I just have to send
 money home.  .  . . Oh, we were just beginning to have
 such fun and now you have to go and spoil everything.’’
     “If you’d seen what I’ve seen you’d talk differently,”
 said Mary French coldly. They were never very good
 friends again after that.
     Gus Moscowski found her a room with heavy lace cur--

 tains in the windows in the house of a Polish storekeeper
 who was a cousin of his father’s. He escorted her solemnly
 back there from the office nights when they worked late,
 and they always did work late.

                                                                               137

1053
    Mary French had never worked so hard in her life. She
wrote releases, got up statistics on t.b., undernourishment
of children, sanitary conditions, crime, took trips on inter-
urban trolleys and slow locals to Rankin and Braddock and
Homestead and Bessemer and as far as Youngstown and
Steubenville and Gary, took notes on speeches of Foster
and Fitzpatrick, saw meetings broken up and the troopers
in their darkgrey uniforms moving in a line down the un-
paved alleys of company patches, beating up men and
women with their clubs, kicking children out of their way,
chasing old men off their front stoops. ^^And to think,” said
Gus of the troopers, ^ffhat the sonsabitches are lousy Po-
lacks themselves most of ’em. Now ain’t that just like a
Polack^”
    She interviewed metropolitan newspapermen, spent
hours trying to wheedle A.P. and U.P. men into sending
straight stories, smoothed out the grammar in the English-
language leaflets. The fall flew by before she knew it. The
Amalgamated could only pay the barest expenses, her
clothes were in awful shape, there was no curl in her hair,
at night she couldn’t sleep for the memory of the things
she’d seen, the jailings, the bloody heads, the wreck of
some family’s parlor, sofa cut open, chairs smashed, china-
closet hacked to pieces with an ax, after the troopers had
been through looking for ^diterature.” She hardly knew
herself when she looked at her face in the greenspotted
giltframed mirror over the washstand as she hurriedly
dressed in the morning. She had a haggard desperate look.
She was beginning to look like a striker herself.
    She hardly knew herself either when Gus’s voice gave
her cold shivers or when whether she felt good or not that
day depended on how often he smiled when he spoke to
her^ it didn’t seem like herself at all the way that when-
ever her mind was free for a moment, she began to im-
agine him coming close to her, putting his arms around
her, his lips, his big hard hands. When that feeling came

         138

1054
on she would have to close her eyes and would feel herself
dizzily reeling. Then sheM force her eyes open and fly at
her typing and after a while would feel cool and clear
again.
    The day Mary French admitted to herself for the first
time that the highpaid workers weren’t coming out and
that the lowpaid workers were going to lose their strike
she hardly dared look Gus in the face when he called for
her to take her home. It was a muggy drizzly outofseason
November night. As they walked along the street without
saying anything the fog suddenly glowed red in the direc-
tion of the mills. ^There they go,” said Gus. The glow
grew and grew, first pink then orange. Mary nodded and
said nothing. “What can you do when the woikin’class
won’t stick together. Every kind of damn foreigner thinks
the others is bums and the ’Mericans they think every-
body’s a bum ’cept you an’ me. Wasn’t so long ago we was
all foreigners in this man’s country. Christ, I dunno why I
string along wid ’em.”
    “Gus, what would you do if we lost the strike? I mean
you personally.”
    “I’ll be on the black books all right. Means I couldn’t
get me another job in the metaltrades not if 1 was the last
guy on earth. . .     . Hell, I dunno. Take a false name an’
join the Navy, I guess. They say a guy kin get a real good
eddication in the Navy.”
    “I guess we oughtn’t to talk about it. . . . Me, I don’t
know what I’ll do.”
    “You kin go anywheres and gt a job on a paper like
you had. ... I wish I had your schoolin’. ... I bet
you’ll be glad to be quit of this bunch of hunkies.”
    “They are the workmgclass, Gus.”
    “Sure, if we could only git more sense into our damn
heads. ... You know I’ve got an own brother scabbin’
right to this day.”
    “He’s probably worried about his wife and family.”

                                                                               139

1055
            worry him if I could git my hands on him. . . .
A woikin^man ain’t got no right to have a wife and family.’’
    “He can have a girl.     . . Her voice failed. She felt
her heart beating so hard as she walked along beside him
over the uneven uavement she was afraid he’d hear it.

    “Girls aplenty.” Gus laughed. “They’re free and easy,
Polish girls are. That’s one good thing.”
   “I wish    .  . .” Mary heard her voice saying.
    “Well, goodnight. Rest good, you look all in,” He’d
given her a pat on the shoulder and he’d turned and gone
off with his long shambling stride. She was at the door of
her house. When she got in her room she threw herself on
the bed and cried.
    It was several weeks later that Gus Moscowski was ar-
rested distributing leaflets in Braddock. She saw him
brought up before the squire, in the dirty courtroom packed
close with the grey uniforms of statetroopers, and sen-
tenced to five years. His arm was in a sling and there was
a scab of clotted blood on the towy stubble on the back of
his head. His blue eyes caught hers in the crowd and he
grinned and gave her a jaunty wave of a big hand. “So
that’s how it is, is it?” snarled a voice beside her. “Well,
you’ve had the last piece of c—k you get outa dat baby.”
    There was a hulking grey trooper on either side of her.
They hustled her out of court and marched her down to
the interurban trolleystop. She didn’t say anything but she
couldn’t keep back the tears. She hadn’t known men could
talk to women like that. “Come on now, loosen up, me an’
Steve here we’re twice the men. ... You ought to have
better sense than to be spreadin’ your legs for that punk.’’
    At last the Pittsburgh trolley came and they put her on
it with a warning that if they ever saw her around again
 they’d have her up for soliciting. As the car pulled out
she saw them turn away slapping each other on the back
 and laughing. She sat there hunched up in the seat in the
 back of the car with her stomach churning and her face set.

         140

1056
Back at the office ail she said was that the cossacks had run
her out of the courthouse.
   When she heard that George Barrow was in town with
the Senatorial Investigati. g Commission, she went to him
at once. She waited for him in the lobby of the Schenley.
The still winter evening was one block of black iron cold.
She was shivering in her thin coat. She was deadtired. It
seemed weeks since sheM slept. It was warm in the big
quiet hotel lobby, through her thin paper soles she could
feel the thick nap of the carpet. There must have been a
bridgeparty somewhere in the hotel because groups of
welldressed middleaged women that reminded her of her
mother kept going through the lobby. She let herself drop
into a deep chair by a radiator and started at once to
drowse off.
    “You poor little girl, I can see youVe been working.

. . . This is different from socialservice work, Til bet.”
She opened her eyes. George had on a furlined coat with
a furcollar out of which his thin neck and long knobby
 face stuck out comically like the head of a marabou stork.
She got up. “Oh, Mr. Barrow ... I mean George.” He
 took her hand in his left hand and patted it gently with
 his right. “Now I know what the frontline trenches are
 like,” she said, laughing at his kind comical look. “YouTe
 laughing at my furcoat. . . . Wouldn’t help the Amai-
 gamated if I got pneumonia, would it'’   . . . Why haven’t
 you got a warm coat?     . . . Sweet little Mary French.
 ... Just exactly the person I wanted to see. . . . Do you
 mind if we go up to the room? I don’t like to talk here,
 too many eavesdroppers.”
     Upstairs in his square warm room with pink hangings
 and pink lights he helped her off with her coat. He stood
 there frowning and weighing it in his hand. “You’ve got to
 get a warm coat,” he said. After he’d ordered tea for her
 from the waiter he rather ostentatiously left the door into
 the hall open. They settled down on either side of a little

                                                                               14J

1057
table at the foot of the bed that was littered with news-
papers and typewritten sheets. ^Well, well, well,’^ he said.

‘^^Thls IS a great pleasure for a lonely old codger like me.
What would you think of having dinner with the senator?

.  . . To see how the other half lives.”
    Thev talked and talked. Now and then he slipped a

little whiskey in her tea. He was very kind, said he was
sure all the boys could be gotten out of jail as soon as the
strike was settled and that it virtually was settled. HeM
just been over in Youngstown talking to Fitzpatrick. He
thought he’d just about convinced him that the only thing
to do was to get the men back to work. He had Judge
Gary’s own private assurance that nobody would be dis-
criminated against and that experts were working on the
problem of an eighthour day. As soon as the technical dif-

ficulties could be overcome the whole picture of the steel-
worker’s life would change radically for the better. Then
and there he offered to put Mary French on the payroll
as his secretary. He said her actual experience with condi-
tions would be invaluable in influencing legislation. If the
 great effort of the underpaid steelworkers wasn’t to be lost

 It would have to be incorporated in legislation. The center
 of the fight was moving to Washington, He felt the time
 Was ripe in the senate. She said her first obligation was to
 ^he strike committee. ^^But, my dear sweet child,” George
 Barrow said, gently patting the back of her hand, ^hn a few
 days there won’t be any strikecommittee.”
     The senator was a southerner with irongrey hair and
 white spats who looked at Mary French when he first
 came in the room as if he thought she was going to plant a
 bomb under the big bulge of his creamcolored vest, but
 his fatherly respectful delicate flowerofwomanhood man-
 ner was soothing. They ordered dinner brought up to
 George’s room. The senator kidded George in a heavy
  rotund way about his dangerous Bolsheviki friends. They’d
 been putting away a good deal of rye and the ^moky air of

          142

1058
George’s room was rich with whiskey. When she left them
to go down to the ofEce again they were talking about tak-
ing in a burlesque show.
   The bunch down at the office looked haggard and sour.
When she told them about G. H. Barrow’s offer they told
her to jump at itj of course it would be wonderful to have
her working for them in Washington and beside they
wouldn’t be able to pay even her expenses any more. She
finished her release and glumly said goodnight. That night
she slept better than she had for weeks though all the way
home she was haunted by Gus Moscowski’s blue eyes and
his fair head with the blood clotted on it and his jaunty
grin when his eyes met hers in the courtroom. She had
decided that the best way to get the boys out of jail was to
go to Washington with George.
    Next morning George called her up at the office first
thing and asked her what about the job. She said she’d take
                                                                   maybe he could
it. He said would fifty a week be all right 5
raise it to seventyfive later. She said it was more than she’d
ever made in her life. He said he wanted her to come
right around to the Schenleyj he had something important
for her to do. When she got there he met her in the lobby
with a hundreddollar bill in his hand. ^The first thing I
want you to do, sweet girl, is to go buy yourself a warm
overcoat. Here’s two weeks’ salary in advance. ... You
won’t be any good to me as a secretary if you catch your
death of pneumonia the first day.”
    On the parlorcar going to Washington he handed over
to her two big square black suitcases full of testimony.
^^Don’t think for a moment there’s no work connected with
this job,” he said, fishing out manila envelope after manila
envelope full of closely typed stenographers’ notes on
onionskin paper. ^^The other stuff was more romantic,” he
said, sharpening a pencil, ^ffiut this in the longrangc view
is more useful.”
        wonder,’^ said Mary.
                                                                              H3

1059
    ^^Mary dear, you are very young . . . and very sweet.^'
He sat back in his greenplush armchair looking at her a
long time with his bulging eyes while the snowy hills
streaked with green of lichened rocks and laced black with
bare branches of trees filed by outside. Then he blurted out
wouldn’t it be fun if they got married when they got to
Washington. She shook her head and went back to the
problem of strikers’ defense but she couldn’t help smiling
at him when she srid she didn’t want to get married just
yet; he’d been so kind. She felt he was a real friend.
    In Washington she fixed herself up a little apartment
in a house on H Street that was being sublet cheap by
Democratic ofiiceholders who were moving out. She often
cooked supper for George there. She’d never done any
cooking before except camp cooking, but George was quite
an expert and knew how to make Italian spaghetti and
chiliconcarne and oysterstew and real French bouillabaisse.
He’d get wine from the Rumanian Embassy and they’d
have very cozy meals together after long days working in
the office. He talked and talked about love and the impor-
tance of a healthy sexlife for men and women, so that at
last she let him. He was so tender and gentle that for a
while she thought maybe she really loved him. He knew
all about contraceptives and was very nice and humorous
about them. Sleeping with a man didn’t make as much dif-
ference in her life as she’d expected it would.
    The day after Harding’s inauguration two seedylooking
men in shapeless grey caps shuffled up to her in the lobby
of the little building on G Street where George’s office was.
One of them was Gus Moscowski. His cheeks were hollow
and he looked tired and dirty. ^^Hello, Miss French,” he
said. ^^Meet the kid brother . . . not the one that scabbed,
this one’s on the up and up. ... You sure do look well.”
 *^Oh, Gus, they let you out.” He nodded. ^^New trial, cases
dismissed. . . . But I tell you it’s no fun in that cooler.”

         144

1060
She took them up to George’s office.          sure Mr. Bar-
row’ll want to get firsthand news of the steelworkers.”
   Gus made a gesture of pushing something away with his
hand. ^We ain’t steelworkers, we’re bums. . . . Your
friends the senators sure sold us out pretty. Every sonofa-
bitch ever walked across the street with a stnker’s black-
listed. The old man got his job back, way back at fifty
cents instead of a dollar ten after the priest made him kiss
the book and promise not to join the union.   .  . . Lots of
people goin’ back to the old country. Me an’ the kid we
pulled out, went down to Baltimore to git a job on a boat
somewheres but the seamen are piled up ten deep on the
wharf. ... So we thought we might as well take in the
’nauguration and see how the fat boys looked.”
    Mary tried to get them to take some money but they
shook their heads and said, ^^We don’t need a handout, we
can woik.” They were just going when George came in.
He didn’t seem any too pleased to see them, and began

                                               if the strikers hadn’t threat-
to lecture them on violence j
ened violence and allowed themselves to be misled by a lot
of Bolshevik agitators, the men who were really negotiat-
ing a settlement from the inside would have been able to
get them much better terms.          won’t argue with you,
Mr. Barrow. I suppose you think Father Kazinski was a
red and that it was Fanny Sellers that bashed in the head
of a statetrooper. An’ then you say you’re on the side of
the woikin’man.”
    ^^And, George, even the senate committee admitted that
the violence was by the deputies and statetroopers. ... I
saw it myself after all,” put in Mary.
    ‘^Of course, boys ... I know what you’re up against.
... I hold no brief for the Steel Trust.          . . . But, Mary,
what I want to impress on these boys is that the working-
man is often his own worst enemy in these things.”
    ^^The woikin’ man gits f’rooked whatever way you
look at it,” said Gus, ^^and I don’t know whether it’s his
                                                                               HS

1061
friends or his enemies does the worst roo!dn\ . . . Wellj
we got to git a move on.’^
    “BoySj I’m sorry Pve got so much pressing business to

do. Pd like to hear about your experiences. Maybe some
other time,” said George, settling down at his desK.
    As they left Ma,ry French followed them to tiie door
and whispered to Gus, “And what about Carnegie Tech?”
His eyes didn’t seem so blue as they’d seemed before he
went to jaiL “Well, what about it?” said Gus without look-
ing at her and gently closed the groundglass door behind
him.
    That night while they were eating supper Mary sud-
denly got to her feet and said, “George, we’re as respon-

sible as anybody for selling out the steelworkers.” “Non-
sense, Mary, it’s the fault of the leaders who picked the
wrong minute for the strike and then let the bosses hang
a lot of crazy revolutionary notions on them. Organized
labor gets stung every time it mixes in politics. Gompers
knows that. We all did our best for ’em.”
    Mary French started to walk back and forth in the
room. She was suddenly bitterly uncontrollably angry.
“That’s the way they used to talk back in Colorado
Springs. I might better go back and live with Mother and
do charitywork. It would be better than making a living
off the workingclass.”
    She walked back and forth. He went on sitting there at
the table she’d fixed so carefully with flowers and a white
cloth, drinking little sips of wine and putting first a little
butter on the corner of a cracker and then a piece of Roque-
fort cheese and then biting it off atid then another bit of
butter and another piece of cheese, munching slowly all
the time. She could feel his bulging eyes traveling over her
body. “We’re just laborfakers,” she yelled in his face, and
ran into the bedroom.
    He stood over her still chewing on the cheese and
crackers as he nervously patted the back of her shoulder.
         146

1062
^‘What a spiteful thing to say. . . , My'child, you mustn’t
be so hysterical. .  . . This isn’t the first strike that’s ever
come out badly. .  . . Even this time there’s a gain. Fair-
minded people all over the country have been horrified by
the ruthless violence of the steelbarons. It will influence
legislation. ... Sit up and have a glass of wine.             .  . .
Now, Mary, why don’t we get married? It’s too silly liv-
ing like this. I have some small investments. I saw a nice
little house for sale in Georgetown just the other day.
This is just the time now to buy a house when prices are
                         personnel being cut out of all the depart-
dropping  ,  . ,
ments. .  . . After all I’ve reached an age when I have a
right to settle down and have a wife and kids. . . I
don’t want to wait till it’s too late.”
    Mary sat up sniveling. ^^Oh, George, you’ve got plenty
of time. ... I don’t know why I’ve got a horror of get-
ting married.    . . . Everything gives me the horrors to-
night.” ^Toor little girl, it’s probably the curse coming
on,” said George and kissed her on the forehead. After
he’d gone home to his hotel she decided she’d go back to
Colorado Springs to visit her mother for a while. Then
she’d try to get some kind of newspaper job.
    Before she could get off for the West she found that a
month had gone by. Fear of having a baby began to obsess
her. She didn’t want to tell George about it because she
knew he’d insist on their getting married. She couldn’t
wait. She didn’t know any doctor she could go to. Late
one night she went into the kitchenette to stick her head
in the oven and tried to turn on the gas, but it seemed so
 inconvenient somehow and her feet felt so cold on the
linoleum that she went back to bed.
    Next day she got a letter from Ada Cohn all about what
 a wonderful time Ada was having in New York where she
 had the loveliest apartment and was working so hard on
 her violin and hoped to give a concert in Carnegie Hall
 next season. Without finishing reading the letter Mary

                                                                                147

1063
French started packing her things. She got to the station in
time to get the ten o’clock to New York. From the station
she sent George a wire: friend sick called to new york
WRITING.
    She’d wired Ada and Ada met her at the Pennsylvania
station in New York looking very handsome and rich. In
the taxicab Mary told her that she had to lend her the
money to have an abortion. Ada had a crying fit and said
of course she’d lend her the money but who on earth could
she go to? Honestly she wouldn’t dare ask Dr. Kirstein
about it because he was such a friend of her father’s and
mother’s that he’d be dreadfully upset.           won’t have a
baby. I won’t have a baby,” Mary was muttering.
    Ada had a fine threeroom apartment in the back of a
building on Madison Avenue with a light tancolored car-
pet and a huge grandpiano and lots of plants in pots and
flowers in vases. They ate their supper there and strode
up and down the livmgroom all evening trying to think.
Ada sat at the piano and played Bach preludes to calm her
 nerves, she said, but she was so upset she couldn’t follow
 her music. At last Mary wrote George a specialdelivery
 letter asking him what to do. Next evening she got a reply.
 George was brokenhearted, but he enclosed the address of
 a doctor. Mary gave the letter to Ada to read. “What a
 lovely letter. I don’t blame him at all. He sounds like a
 fine sensitive beautiful nature.” “I hate him,” said Mary,
 driving her nails into the palms of her hands. “I hate
 him.”
     Next morning she went down all alone to the doctor’s
 and had the operation* After it she went home in a taxicab
 and Ada put her to bed. Ada got on her nerves terribly
 tiptoeing in and out of the bedroom with her face wrinkled
 Up. After about a week Mary French got up. She seemed to
 be all right, and started to go around New York looking
 for a job.


          148

1064
                                                                                     46^
                              THE CAMERA EYE (


       walk the streets and walk the streets inqiiiring of

Q>ca Cola signs Lucky Strike ads pricetags in storewindows

scraps of overheard conversations stray tatters of news-

print yesterday’s headlines sticking out of ashcans

       for a set of figures a formula of action an address you

don’t quite know you’ve forgotten the number the street

may be in Brooklyn a train leaving for somewhere a steam^

boat whistle stabbing your ears a job chalked up in frort(

of an agency

        to do to make there are more lives than walking des-

perate the streets hurry underdog do        make

        a speech urging action in the crowded hall after hand-

clapping the pats and smiles of others on the platform the

scrape of chairs the expectant hush the few coughs during

the first stuttering attempt to talk straight tough going the

snatch for a slogan they are listening and then the easy

climb slogan by slogan to applause (if somebody in your

head didn’t say liar to you and on Union Square

        that time you leant from a soapbox over faces      avid

young opinionated old the middleaged numb with over-

 work eyes bleared with newspaperreading          trying to

 tell them the straight dope make them laugh tell them

 what they want to hear wave a flag whispers the internal

 agitator crazy to succeed)

                                                                                149

1065
       you suddenly falter ashamed flush red break out in

sweat why not tell these men stamping in the wind that

We stand on a quicksand?      that doubt is the whetstone

ot understanding is too hard hurts instead of urging

picket John D. Rockefeller the bastard if the cops knock

your blocks off it^s all for the advancement of the human

race       while I go home after a drink and a hot meal and

read (with some difficulty in the Loeb Library trot) the

epigrams of Martial and ponder the course of history and

what leverage might pry the owners loose from power and

bring back (I too Walt Whitman) our storybook democ-

racy

        and all the time in my pocket that letter from that

collegeboy asking me to explain why being right which he

admits        the radicals are in their private lives such shits

        lie abed underdog (peeling the onion of doubt) with

the book unread in your hand and swing on the seesaw

maybe after all maybe topdog        make

        money       you understood what he meant the old

party with the white beard beside the crystal inkpot at the

cleared varnished desk in the walnut office in whose voice
boomed all the clergymen of childhood and shrilled the

 hosannahs of the offkey female choirs        All you say is

very true but there’s such a thing as sales        and I have

daughters Pm sure you too will end by thinking dif-

ferently make
        money in New York (lipstick kissed off the lips of a

         150

1066
girl fashionablydressed fragrant at five o’clock in a taxicab

careening down Park Avenue when at the end of each

crosstown street the west is flaming with gold and white

smoke billows from the smokestacks of steamboats leaving

port and the sky is lined with greenbacks

       the riveters are quiet the trucks of the producers are

shoved off onto the marginal avenues

        winnings sing from every streetcorner

        crackle in the ignitions of the cars swish smooth in

ballbearings sparkle in the lights going on in the show-

windows croak in the klaxons tootle in the horns of im-

ported millionaire shining towncars

        dollars are silky in her hair soft in her dress sprout

in the elaborately contrived rosepetals that you kiss be-

come pungent and crunchy in the speakeasy dinner sting

shrill in the drinks

        make loud the girlandmusic show set off the laughing

jag in the cabaret swing in the shufflingshuffing orchestra

click sharp in the hatcheck girl’s goodnight)

        if not why not? walking the streets rolling on your

bed eyes sting from peeling the speculative onion of doubt

if somebody in your head        topdog?       underdog?

didn’t (and on Union Square) say liar to you

1067
                                                          NEWSREEL LII



        assembled to a service for the dear defartedy the last half
hour of devotion and remembrance of deeds done and work
undone; the remembrance of friendshif and love; of what was
and what could have been. Why not use well that last half
houTy why not make that last service as beautiful as Frank E,
Camfbell can make it at the funeral church {nonsectanan^

                BODY TIED IN BAG IS FOUND FLOATING

         Chinatown my Chinatown where the lights are low
             Hearts that know no other land
                     Drifting to and fro

       APOPLEXY BRINGS END WHILE WIFE READS TO HIM

         Mrs. Harding was reading to him in a low soothing voice.
It had been hoped that he would go to sleep under that in-
fluence
                               DAUGHERTY IN CHARGE

                              All alone
                                  By the telephone
                                          Waiting for a ring

               Two Women’s Bodies in Slayer’s Baggage

                     WORKERS MARCH ON REICHSTAG
                                   CITY IN DARKNESS

 RACE IN TAXI TO PREVENT SUICIDE ENDS IN
                    FAILURE AT THE BELMONT

                Pershing Dances Tango m the Argentine

 HARDING TRAIN CRAWLS FIFTY MILES THROUGH MASSED
                                     CHICAGO CROWDS

                     Girl Out of Work Dies from Poison
          152

1068
            MANY SEE COOLIDGE BUT FEW HEAR HIM

                          If you knew Susie
                              Like I know Susie
                                  Oh oh oh what a girl



                                       ART AND ISADORA


        In San Francisco in eighteen seventyeight Mrs.
Isadora O’Gorman Duncan, a highspirited lady with a
taste for the piano, set about divorcing her husband, the
prominent Mr. Duncan, whose behavior we are led to
                                                                 the whole thing
believe had been grossly indelicate 5
made her so nervous that she declared to her children
that she couldn’t keep anything on her stomach but a
little champagne and oysters; in the middle of the
bitterness and recriminations of the family row,
        into a world of gaslit boardinghouses kept by
ruined southern belles and railroadmagnates and swing-
ing doors and whiskery men nibbling cloves to hide the
whiskey on their breaths and brass spittoons and four-
wheel cabs and basques and bustles and long ruffled
trailing skirts (in which lecturehall and concertroom,
under the domination of ladies of culture, were the cen-
ters of aspiring life)
         she bore a daughter whom she named after herself
 Isadora.
         The break with Mr. Duncan and the discovery of
 his duplicity turned Mrs. Duncan into a bigoted femi-
 nist and an atheist, a passionate follower of Bob Inger-
 soll’s lectures and writings; foi God read Nature; for
 duty beauty, mi only man is vile.
         hlrs. Duncan had a hard struggle to raise her
 children in the love of beauty and the hatred of corsets

                                                                                153

1069
and conventions and manmade laws. She gave piano-
lessons, she did embroidery and knitted scarves and
mittens.
        The Duncans were always in debt.
        The rent was always due.



        Isadora’s earliest memories were of wheedling
grocers and butchers and landlords and selling little
things her mother had made from door to door,
        helping hand valises out of back windows when
they had to jump their bills at one shabbygenteel board-
inghouse after another in the outskirts of Oakland and
San Francisco.
        The little Duncans and their mother were a clan;

it was the Duncans against a rude and sordid world.
The Duncans weren’t Catholics any more or Presby-
terians or Quakers or Baptists; they were Artists.



        When the children were quite young they man-
aged to stir up interest among their neighbors by giv-
ing theatrical performances in a barn; the older girl
Elizabeth gave lessons in society dancing; they were
westerners, the world was a goldrush; they weren’t
ashamed of being in the public eye. Isadora had green
eyes and reddish hair and a beautiful neck and arms.
She couldn’t afford lessons in conventional dancing,
50 she made up dances of her own.


        They moved to Chicago, Isadora got a job dancing
to The Washington Post at the Masonic Temple Roof
Garden for fifty a week. She danced at clubs. She went
to see Augustin Daly and told him she’d discovered
         the Dance
         154

1070
        and went on in New York as a fairy in cheesecloth
in a production of Midsunmter Night’s Dream with
Ada Rehan.



        The family followed her to New York. They
rented a big room in Carnegie Hall, put mattresses in
the corners, hung drapes on the wall and invented the
first Greenwich Village studio.
        They were never more than one jump ahead of
the sheriff, they were always wheedling the tradespeo-
ple out of bills, standing the landlady up for the rent,
coaxing handouts out of nch philistines.
        Isadora arranged recitals with Ethelbert Nevin
        danced to readings of Omar Khayyam for society
women at Newport. When the Hotel Windsor burned
they lost all their trunks and the very long bill they
owed and sailed for London on a cattleboat
        to escape the materialism of their native America.



        In London at the British Museum
        they discovered the Greeks j
        the Dance was Greek.
        Under the smoky chimneypots of London, in
the sootcoated squares they danced in muslin tunics,
they copied poses from Greek vases, went to lectures,
artgalleries, concerts, plays, sopped up in a winter
fifty years of Victorian culture.
        Back to the Greeks.



        Whenever they were put out of their lodgings for
nonpayment of rent Isadora led them to the best hotel
and engaged a suite and sent the waiters scurrying for

                                                                               155

1071
lobster and champagne and fruits outofseasonj nothing
was too good for Artists, Duncans, Greeks j
        and the nineties London liked her gall.
        In Kensington and even in Mayfair she danced at
parties in private houses,
        the Britishers, Prince Edward down,
        were carried away by her preraphaelitc beauty
        her lusty American innocence
        her California accent.



        After London, Paris during the great exposition
of nineteen hundred. She danced with Loie Fuller.
She was still a virgin too shy to return the advances
of Rodin the great master, completely baffled by the
extraordinary behavior of Loie Fuller’s circle of crack-
brained invert beauties. The Duncans were vegetarians,
suspicious of vulgarity and men and materialism. Ray-
mond made them all sandals.
        Isadora and her mother and her brother Raymond
went about Europe in sandals and fillets and Greek
tunics
        staying at the best hotels leading the Greek life
of nature in a flutter of unpaid bills.



        Isadora’s first solo recital was at a theater in
Budapest j
        after that she was the diva, had a loveaffair with
                           in Munich the students took the
a leading actor 5                                                       horses
out of her carriage. Everything was flowers and hand-
clapping and champagne suppers. In Berlin she was the
rage.
        With the money she made on her German tour
she took the Duncans all to Greece. They arrived on a
fishingboat from Ithaca. They posed in the Parthenon
        156

1072
for photographs and danced in the Theater of Dionysus
and trained a crowd of urchins to sing the ancient chorus
from the Suffhants and built a temple to live in on a
hill overlooking the ruins of ancient Athens, but there
was no water on the hill and their money ran out be-
fore the temple was finished
        so they had to stay at the Hotel d’Angleterre and
run up a bill there. When credit gave out they took
their chorus back to Berlin and put on the Supfliants
in ancient Greek. Meeting Isadora in her peplum
marching through the Tiergarten at the head of her
Greek boys marching in order all in Greek tunics, the
kaiserin’s horse shied,
        and her highness was thrown.



         Isadora was the vogue.
         She arrived in St. Petersburg in time to see the
night funeral of the marchers shot down in front of
the Winter Palace in 1905. It hurt her. She was an
                                                        the murdering rulers
American like Walt Whitman 5
                                                              the marchers were
of the world were not her people 5
her people; artists were not on the side of the
machineguns; she was an American in a Greek tunic;
she was for the people.
         In St. Petersburg, still under the spell of the
eighteenthcentury ballet of the court of the Sunking.
         her dancing was considered dangerous by the au-
thorities.
         In Germany she founded a school with the help
of her sister Elizabeth who did the organizing, and she
 had a baby by Gordon Craig.
         She went to Amenca in triumph as she’d always
planned and harried the home philistines with a tour;
 her followers were all the time getting pinched for

                                                                                157

1073
wearing Greek tunics; she found no freedom for Art
in America.



        Back in Paris it was the top of the world; Art
meant Isadora. At the funeral of the Prince de Polig-
nac she met the mythical millionaire (sewingmachine
king) who was to be her backer and to finance her
school. She went off with him in his yacht (whatever
Isadora did was Art)
        to dance in the Temple at Paestum
        only for him,
        but it rained and the musicians all got drenched.
So they all got drunk instead.
        Art was the millionaire life. Art was whatever
Isadora did. She was carrying the millionaire’s child
to the great scandal of the oldlady clubwomen and
spinster artlovers when she danced on her second
American tour;
         she took to drinking too much and stepping to the
footlights and bawling out the boxholders.
         Isadora was at the height of glory and scandal and
power and wealth, her school going, her millionaire
was about to build her a theater in Paris, the Duncans
were the priests of a cult, (Art was whatever Isadora
did),
         when the car that was bringing her two children
home from the other side of Paris stalled on a bridge
across the Seine. Forgetting that he’d left the car in
gear the chauffeur got out to crank the motor. The car
 started, knocked down the chauffeur, plunged off the
 bridge into the Seine.
         The children and their nurse were drowned.




          158

1074
        The rest of her life moved desperately on
        in the clatter of scandalized tongues, among the
kidding faces of reporters, the threatening of bailiffs,
the expostulations of hotelmanagers bringing overdue
bills.
        Isadora drank too much, she couldn’t keep her
hands off goodlooking young men, she dyed her hair
various shades of bnghtred, she never took the trouble
to make up her face properly, was careless about her
dreSs, couldn’t bother to keep her figure in shape,
never could keep track of her money
        but a great sense of health
        filled the hall
        when the pearshaped figure with the beautiful
great arms tramped forward slowly from the back of
the stage.

    I She was afraid of nothing} she was a great dancer.



     I In her own city of San Francisco the politicians
wouldn’t let her dance in the Greek Theater they’d
built under her influence. Wherever she went she gave
offense to the philistmes. When the war broke out she
danced the Marseillaise, but it didn’t seem quite re-
spectable and she gave offense by refusing to give up
Wagner or 'to show the proper respectable feelings
        of satisfaction at the butchery.


         On her South American tour
        she picked up men everywhere,

      - a Spanish painter, a couple of prizefighters, a
stoker, on thie boat, a Brazilian poet,
        brawled in tangohalls, bawled out the Argentines
for niggers from the footlights, lushly triumphed in
Montevideo and Brazil} but if she had money she

                                                                               159

1075
couldn’t help scandalously spending it on tangodancers,
handouts, afterthetheater suppers, the generous gesture,

no, all on my bill. The managers gypped her. She

tvas afraid of nothing, never ashamed in the public eye
of the clatter of scandalized tongues, the headlines in
the afternoon papers.


        When October split the husk off the old world
she remembered St. Petersburg, the coffins lurching
through the silent streets, the white faces, the clenched

fists that night in St. Petersburg, and danced the Marche
Slave
        and waved red cheesecloth under the noses of the
Boston old ladies in Symphony Hall,
        but when she went to Russia full of hope of a
school and work and a new life in freedom, it was too
enormous, it was too difficult: cold, vodka, lice, no
service in the hotels, new and old still piled pellmell
together, seedbed and scrapheap, she hadn’t the pa-
tience, her life had been too easy;
        she picked up a yellowhaired poet
        and brought him back
        to Europe and the grand hotels.
        Yessenin smashed up a whole floor of the Adlon
in Berlin in one drunken party, he ruined a suite at
the Continental in Paris. When he went back to Russia
he killed himself. It was too enormous, it was too diffi-
cult.


        When it was impossible to raise any more money
for Art, for the crowds eating and drinking in the
hotel suites and the rent of Rolls-Royces and the board
of her pupils and disciples,
         Isadora went down to the Riviera to write her
         i6o

1076
memoirs to scrape up some cash out of the American
public that had awakened after the war to the crassness
of materialism and the Greeks and scandal and Art,
and still had dollars to spend.
        She hired a studio in Nice, but she could never
pay the rent. She’d quarreled with her millionaire.
Her jewels, the famous emerald, the ermine cloak, the
works of art presented by the artists had all gone into
the pawnshops or been seized by hotelkeepers. All she
had was the old blue drapes that had seen her great
triumphs, a redleather handbag, and an old furcoat
that was split down the back.
        She couldn’t stop drinking or putting her arms
round the neck of the nearest young man, if she got
any cash she threw a party or gave it away.
        She tried to drown herself but an English naval
officer pulled her out of the moonlit Mediterranean.


        One day at a little restaurant at Golfe Juan she
picked up a goodlooking young wop who kept a garage
and drove a little Bugatti racer.
        Saying that she might want to buy the car, she
made him go to her studio to take her out for a ridej
        her friends didn’t want her to go, said he was
nothing but a mechanic, she insisted, she’d had a few
drinks (there was nothing left she cared for in the
world but a few drinks and a goodlooking young man) j
        she got in beside him and
        she threw her heavilyfringed scarf round her neck
with a big sweep she had and
         turned back and said,
        with the strong California accent her French
never lost;
         Adieu, mes amis, je vais a la gloire.
         The mechanic put his car in gear and started.

                                                                               i6i

1077
         The heavy trailing scarf caught in a wheel, wound

tight. Her head was wrenched against the side of the

car. The car stopped instantly; her neck was broken,
her nose crushed, Isadora was dead.




                                                       NEWSREEL LIII


                                    Bye bye blackbird

ARE you NEW YORK’S MOST BEAUTIFUL
                       GIRL STENOGRAPHER?

             No one here can love and understand me
                 Oh what hard luck stories they all hand me

                      BRITAIN DECIDES TO GO IT ALONE

        you too can quickly learn dancing at home without music
and without a partner .       . . produces the same results as an
experienced masseur only quicker, easier and less expensive.
Remember only marriageable men in the full possession of
unusual physical strength will be accepted as the Graphic
Apollos
                     Make my bed and light the light
                         ril arrive late to-night

                   WOMAN IN HOME SHOT AS BURGLAR

                  Grand Duke Here to Enjoy Himself

                 ECLIPSE FOUR SECONDS LATE
                        Downtown Gazers See Corona

        others are more dressy being made of rich ottoman silks,
heavy satins, silk crepe or cote de cheval with ornamentation
of ostrich perhaps

           MAD DOG PANIC IN PENN STATION

1078
                         UNHAPPY WIFE TRIES TO DIE

        the richly blended beauty of the finish, both interior and
exterior, can come only from the hand of an artist working
towards an ideal. Substitutes good normal solid tissue for that
disfiguring fat. He touches every point in the entire compass
of human need. It may look a little foolish in print but he can
show you how to grow brains. If you are a victim of physical
ill-bemg he can liberate you from pain. He can show you how
to dissolve marital or conjugal problems. He is an expert in
matters of sex

                                     Blackbird bye bye

                SKYSCRAPERS BLINK ON EMPTY STREETS

         it was a very languid, a very pink and white Peggy Joyce
in a very pmk and white boudoir who held out a small white
hand



                                                MARGO DOWLINCJ


     When Margie got big enough she used to go across to
the station to meet Fred with a lantern dark winter nights
when he was expected to be getting home from the city on
the nine fourteen. Margie was very little for her age,
 Agnes used to say, but her red broadcloth coat with the
 fleece collar tickly round her ears was too small for her all
 the same, and left her chapped wrists out nights when the
 sleety wind whipped round the corner of the station and
 the wire handle of the heavy lantern cut cold into he^
 hand. Always she went with a chill creeping down he'
 spine and in her hands and feet for fear Fred wouldn^f
 be himself and would lurch and stumble the way he some*

 tim^es did and be so red in the face and talk so awful. Mn
 Bemis the stoopshouldered station agent used to kid abou^

 it with big Joe Hines the sectionhand who was often put 

                                                                                         163

1079
taring around in the station at traintime, and Margie
would stand outside in order not to listen to them saying,
^^Well, here^s bettin’ Fred Dowlin’ comes in stinkin^ again

tonight.” It was when he was that way that he needed
Margie and the lantern on account of the plankwalk over

to the house being so narrow and slippery. When she was
a very little girl she used to think that it was because he
was so tired from the terrible hard work in the city that he
walked so funny when he got off the train but by the time
she was eight or nine Agnes had told her all about how
getting drunk was something men did and that they hadn^t
ought to. So every night she felt the same awful feeling
when she saw the lights of the train coming towards her
across the long trestle from Ozone Park.
    Sometimes he didn’t come at all and she’d go back home
crying, but the good times he would jump springily off
the train, square in his big overcoat that smelt of pipes,
and swoop down on her and pick her up lantern and all:
^^How’s Daddy’s good little girP” He would kiss her
and she would feel so proudhappy riding along there and
looking at mean old Mr. Bemis from up there, and Fred’s
voice deep in his big chest would go rumbling through his
muffler, ^^Goodnight, chief,” and the yellowlighted win-
dows of the train would be moving and the red caterpil-
lar’s eyes in its tail would get little and draw together as
the train went out of sight across the trestle towards Ham-
mels. She would bounce up and down on his shoulder and
feel the muscles of his arm hard like oars tighten against
her when he’d run with her down the plankwalk shouting
to Agnes, ^^Any supper left, girlie?” and Agnes would
eome to the door grinning and wiping her hands on her
apron and the big pan of hot soup would be steaming on
the stove, and it would be so cozywarm and neat in the
kitchen, and they’d let Margie sit up till she was nodding
and her eyes were sandy and there was the sandman com-
ing in the door, listening to Fred tell about pocket billiards
         164

1080
and sweepstakes and racehorses and terrible fights In the
city. Then Agnes would carry her into bed in the cold
room and Fred would stand over her smoking his pipe
and tell her about shipwrecks at Fire Island when he was
in the Coast Guard, till the chinks of light coming in
through the door from the kitchen got more and more
blurred, and in spite of Margie^s trying all the time to
keep awake because she was so happy listening to Fred’s
burring voice, the sandman she’d tried to pretend had lost
the tram would come in behind Fred, and she’d drop off.
    As she got older and along in gradeschool at Rockaway
Park it got to be less often like that. More and more Fred
was drunk when he got off the train or else he didn’t come
at aU. Then it was Agnes who would tell her stories about
the old days and what fun it had been, and Agnes would
sometimes stop in the middle of a story to cry, about how
Agnes and Margie’s mother had been such friends and
both of them had been salesladies at Siegel Cooper’s at
the artificialflower counter and, used to go to Manhattan
Beach, so much more refined than Coney, Sundays, not to
the Oriental Hotel of course, that was too expensive, but
to a little beach near there, and how Fred was lifeguard
there. ‘^You should have seen him in those days, with his
strong tanned limbs he was the handsomest man .       .
^^But he’s handsome now, isn’t he, Agnes?” Margie would
put in anxiously. ^^Of course, dearie, but you ought to have
seen him in those days.” And Agnes would go on about
how lucky he was at the races and how many people he’d
saved from drowning and how all the people who owned
the concessions chipped in to give him a bonus every year
and how much money he always had in his pocket and a
wonderful laugh and was such a cheery fellow. ^^That
was the ruination of him,” Agnes would say.               never
could say no.” And Agnes would tell about the wedding
and the orangeblossoms and the cake and how Margie’s
mother Margery died when she was born. ^^She gav^
                                                                               x65

1081
                                                            it made Margie feel
her life for yourSj never forget that” 3
dreadfulj like she wasn’t her own self, when Agnes said

that. And then one day when Agnes came out of work
there he’d been standing on the sidewalk wearing a derby
hat and all dressed in black and asking her to marry him
because she’d been Margery Ryan’s best friend, and so
they were married, but Fred never got over it and never
could say no and that was why Fred took to drinking and

lost his job at Holland’s and nobody would hire him on
any of the beaches on account of his fighting and drinking
and so they’d moved to Broad Channel but they didn’t
make enough with bait and rowboats and' an occasional
shoredinner so Fred had gotten a job in Jamaica in a
saloon keeping bar because he had such a fine laugh' and
was so goodlooking and everybody liked him so. But that
was the ruination of him worse than ever. ^^But there’s
not a finer man in the world than Fred Dowling when
he’s himself. . . . Never forget that, Margie.”               ‘ And
they’d both begin to cry and Agnes would ask Margie if
she loved her as much as if she’d been her own mother
and Margie would cry and say, ^Tes, Aghes darling.”
'^You must always love me,” Agnes would say, ^^because
God doesn’t seem to want me to have any little babies of
my own.”
    Margie had to go over on the train every day to go to
school at Rockaway Park. She got along well in the grade-
school and liked the teachers and the books and the sing-
ing but the children teased because her clothes were all
homemade and funnylooking and because she was a mick
and a Catholic and lived in a house built on stilts. After
she’d been Goldilocks in the school play one Christmas,
that was all changed and she began to have a better time
at school than at home.
   At home there was always so much housework to do,
ignes was always washing and ironing and scrubbing be-
 iause Fred hardly ever brought in any money any more.
        166

1082
He’d lurch into the house drunk and dirty and smelling
of stale beer aiid whiskey and curse and grumble about the
food and why didn’t Agnes ever have a nice piece of steak
any more for him like she used to when he got home from
the city and Agnes would break down, blubbering, ^What
am I going to use for money?” Then he would call her
dirty name^, and Margie would run into her bedroom and
slam the door and sometimes even pull the bureau across

it and get into bed and lie there shabng. Sometimes when
Agn'eS was putting breakfast on the table, always in a
fluster for fear Margie would miss the train to school,
Agnes would have a black eye and her face would be
swollen and puffy where he’d hit her and she’d have a
meek sorryforherself look Margie hated. And Agnes
would be muttering all the time she watched the cocoa and
condensed milk heating on the stove, ^^God knows I’ve
done my best and worked my fingers to the bone for him.

. .   . Holy saints of God, things can’t go on like this.”
    All Margie’s dreams were about running away.
    In summer they would sometimes have had fun if it
hadn’t been for always dreading that Fred would take a bit
too much. Fred would get the rowboats out of the boat-
house the first sunny day of spring and work like a demon
calking and painting them a fresh green and whistle as he
worked, or he would be up before day digging clams or
catching shiners for bait with a castingnet, and there was
money around and big pans of chowder Long Island style
and New England style simmering on* the back of the

stove, and Agnes was happy and singing and always in a

bustle fixing shoredinners and sandwiches for fishermen^
and Margie would go out sometimes with fishingparties,
and Fred taught her to swim in the clear channel up under
the railroad bridge and took her with him barefoot over
the muddy flats clamming and after softshell crabs, and
sportsmen with fancy vests who came down to rent a boat
would often give her a quarter. When Fred was in a sober

                                                                                167

1083
spell it was lovely in summer^ the warm smell o£ the
marshgrass, the freshness of the tide coming m through the

inletj the itch of saltwater and sunburn, but then as soon

as he’d gotten a little money together Fred would get to
drinking and Agnes’s eyes would be red all the time and
the business would go to pot. Margie hated the way
Agnes’s face got ugly and red when she cried, she’d tell

herself that she’d never cry no matter what happened
when she grew up.
    Once m a while during the good times Fred would say
he was going to give the family a treat and they’d get all
dressed up and leave the place with old man Hines, Joe
Hines’s father, who had a wooden leg and big bushy white
whiskers, and go over on the train to the beach and walk
along the boardwalk to the amusementpark at Holland’s.
    It was too crowded and Margie would be scared of get-
ting something on her pretty dress and there was such a
glare and men and women with sunburned arms and legs
and untidy hair lying out in the staring sun with sand over
them, and Fred and Agnes would romp around in their
bathingsuits like the others. Margie was scared of the big
spuming surf crashing over her head, even when Fred held
her in his arms she was scared and then it was terrible he’d
swim so far out.
   Afterwards they’d get back itchy Into their clothes and
walk along the boardwalk shrilling with peanutwagons
and reeking with the smell of popcorn and saltwater taffy
and hotdogs and 'mustard and beer all mixed up with the
surf and the clanking roar of the rollercoaster and the
steamcalliope from the merrygoround and so many horrid
people pushing and shoving, stepping on your toes. She
was too little to see over them. It was better when Fred
hoisted her on his shoulder though she was too old to ride
on her father’s shoulder in spite of being so small for her
age and kept pulling at her prettv paleblue frock to keep
it from getting above her knees.
         i68

1084
    What she liked at the beach was playing the game where
you rolled a little ball over the clean narrow varnished
boards into holes with numbers and there was a Jap therc
in a clean starched white coat and shelves and shelves of
the cutest little things for prizes: teapots, little china men
that nodded their heads, vases for flowers, rows and rows
of the prettiest Japanese dolls with real eyelashes some
of them, and jars and jugs and pitchers. One time Margie
won a little teapot shaped like an elephant that she kept
for years. Fred and Agnes didn^t seem to think much of
the little Jap who gave the prizes but Margie thought he
was lovely, his face was so smooth and he had such a funny
little voice and his lips and eyelids were so clearly marked
just like the dolls’ and he had long black eyelashes too.
    Margie used to think she’d like to have him to take to
bed with her like a doll. She said that and Agnes and Fred
laughed and laughed at her so that she felt awful ashamed.
    But what she liked best at Holland’s Beach was the
vaudeville theater. They’d go in there and the crowds and
laughs and racket would die away as the big padded doors
closed behind them. There’d be a movmgpicture going on
when they went in. She didn’t like that much, but what she
liked best in all the world were the illustrated songs that
came next, the pictures of lovely ladies and gentlemen in
colors like tinted flowers and such lovely dresses and big
hats and the words with pansies and forgetmenots around
them and the lady or gentleman singing them to the dark
theater. There were always boats on ripply streams and
ladies in lovely dresses being helped out of them, but not
like at Broad Channel where it was so glary and there was
nothing but mudflats and the slimysmelly piles and the
boatlanding lying on the ooze when the tide went out, but
lovely blue ripply rivers with lovely green banks and
weepingwillowtrees hanging over them. After that it was
vaudeville. There were acrobats and trained seals and men
in straw hats who told funny jokes and ladies that danced.
                                                                                i6q

1085
The Merry Widow Girls it was once, in their big black
hats tipped up so wonderfully on one side and their
sheathdresses and trains in blue and green and purple and
yellow and orange and red, and a handsome young man in
a cutaway coat waltzing with each in turn.
    The trouble with going to Holland's Beach was that
Fred would meet friends there and keep going in through
swinging doors and coming back with his eyes bright and
a smell of whiskey and pickled onions on his breath, and
halfway through the good time, Margie would see that
worried meek look coming over Agnesis face, and then
sheM know that there would be no more fun that day. The
last time they all went over together to the beach they lost
Fred although they looked everywhere for him, and had
to go home without him. Agnes sobbed so loud that every-
body stared at her on the tram and Ed Otis the conductor
who was a friend of Fred’s came over and tried to tell her
not to take on so, but that only made Agnes sob the worse.
Margie was so ashamed she decided to run away or kill
herself as soon as she got home so that she wouldn’t have
to face the people on the train ever again.
    That time Fred didn’t turn up the next day the way he
usually did. Joe Hines came in to say that a guy had told
him he’d seen Fred on a bat over in Brooklyn and that
he didn’t think he’d come home for a while. Agnes made
Margie go to bed and she could hear her voice and Joe
Hines’s in the kitchen talking low for hours. Margie woke
up with a start to find Agnes in her nightgown getting into
bed with her. Her cheeks were fiery hot and she kept say-
ing, “Imagine his nerve and him a miserable trackwalker.

 . . . Margie. ... We can’t stand this life any more, can
 we, little girl?”
    “I bet he’d come here fussing, the dreadful old thing,”
said Margie.
    “Something like that. . . . Oh, it’s too awful, I can’t
         170

1086
stand it any more. God knows IVe worked my fingers to
the bone.”
    Margie suddenly came out with, ^^Well, when the cat’s
away the mice will play,” and was surprised at how long
Agnes laughed though she was crying too.
    In September just when Agnes was fixing up Margie’s
dresses for the opening of school, the rentman came round
for the quarter’s rent. All they’d heard from Fred was a
letter with a fivedollar bill m it. He said he’d gotten into a
fight and gotten arrested and spent two weeks in jail but
that he had a job now and would be home as soon as he’d
straightened things out a little. But Margie knew they
owed the five dollars and twelve dollars more for gro-
ceries. When Agnes came back into the kitchen from talk-
ing to the rentman with her face streaky and horrid with
crying, she told Margie that they were going into the city
to live. always told Fred Dowling the day would come
when I couldn’t stand it any more. Now he can make his
own home after this.”
    It was a dreadful day when they got their two bags and
the awful old dampeaten trunk up to the station with the
help of Joe Hines, who was always doing odd jobs for
Agnes when Fred was away, and got on the train that took
them into Brooklyn. They went to Agnes’s father’s and
mother’s, who lived in the back of a small paperhanger’s
store on Fulton Street under the el. Old Mr. Fisher was
a paperhanger and plasterer and the whole house smelt of
paste and turpentine and plaster. He was a small little
grey man and Mrs. Fisher was just like him except that
he had drooping grey mustaches and she didn’t. They fixed
up a cot for Margie in the parlor but she could see that
they thought she was a nuisance. She didn’t like them
either and hated it in Brooklyn.
    It was a relief when Agnes said one evening when she
came home before supper looking quite stylish, Margie
thought, in her city clothes, that she’d taken a position as

                                                                               171

1087
cook with a family on Brooklyn Heights and that she was
going to send Margie to the Sisters’ this winter.
    Margie was a little scared all the time she was at the
convent, from the minute she went in the door of the grey-
stone vestibule with a whitemarble figure standing up in
the middle of it. Margie hadn’t ever had much religion,
and the Sisters were scary in their dripping black with their

faces and hands looking so pale always edged with white
starched stuff, and the big dark church full of candles and
the catechismclass and confession, and the way the little
bell rang at mass for everybody to close their eyes when
the Saviour came down among angels and doves in a glare
of amber light onto the altar. It was funny, after the way
Agnes had let her run round the house without any clothes
on, that when she took her bath once a week the Sister
made her wear a sheet right in the tub and even soap her-
self under it.
    The winter was a long slow climb to Christmas, and
after all the girls had talked about what they’d do at
Christmas sc much Margie’s Christmas was awful, a late
gloomy dinner with Agnes and the old people and only
one or two presents. Agnes looked pale, she was deadtired
from getting the Christmas dinner for the people she
worked for. She did bring a net stocking full of candy and
a pretty goldenhaired dolly with eyes that opened and
closed, but Margie felt like crying. Not even a tree. Al-
ready sitting at the table she was busy making up things
to tell the other girls anyway,
    Agnes was just kissing her goodnight and getting ready
putting on her little worn furpiece to go back to Brooklyn
Heights when Fred came in very much under the influence
and wanted to take them all out on a party. Of course they
wouldn’t go and he went away mad and Agnes went away
crying, and Margie lay awake half the night on the cot
made up for her in the old peoples’ parlor thinking how
awful It was to be poor and have a father like that.

1088
    It was dreary, too, hanging round the old people’s
w^hile the vacation lasted. There was no place to play and
they scolded her for the least little thing. It was bully to
get back to the convent where there was a gym and she
could play basketball and giggle with the other girls at
recess. The winter term began to speed up towards Easter.
Just before, she took her first communion. Agnes made the
white dress for her and all the Sisters rolled up their eyes
and said how pretty and pure she looked with her golden
curls and blue eyes like an angel, and Minette Hardy, an
older girl with a snubnose, got a crush on her and used to
pass her chocolatepeppermints in the playground wrapped
in bits of paper with little messages scrawled on them: To
Goldilocks with love from her darling Minette, and things
like that.
    She hated It when commencement came, and there was
nothing about summer plans she could tell the other girls.
She grew fast that summer and got gawky and her breasts
began to show. The stuffy gritty hot weather dragged on
endlessly at the Fishers’. It was awful there cooped up
with the old people. Old Mrs. Fisher never let her forget
that she wasn’t really Agnes’s little girl and that she
thought it was silly of her daughter to support the child
of a noaccount like Fred. They tried to get her to do
enough housework to pay for her keep and every day there
were scoldings and tears and tantrums.
    Margie was certainly happy when Agnes came in one
day and said that she had a new job and that she and
Margie would go over to New York to live. She jumped
up and down yelling, “Goody goody.        . . . Oh, Agnes,
we’re going to get rich.” “A fat chance,” said Agnes, “but
anyway it’ll be better than being a servant.”
    They gave their trunks and bags to an expressman and
went over to New York on the el and then uptown on the
subway. The streets of the uptown West Side looked
amazingly big and wide and sunny to Margie. They were

                                                                                173

1089
going to live with the Francinis in a little apartment        , on
the corner on the same block with the bakery they ran on
Amsterdam Avenue where Agnes was going to work. They
had a small room for the two of them but it had a canary-

bird in a cage and a lot of plants in the window and the
Francinis were both of them fat and jolly and they had
cakes with icing on them at every meal. Mrs. Francini was
Grandma Fisher’s sister.
    They didn’t let Margie play with the other children -on
the block} the Francinis said it wasn’t a safe block for little

girls. She only got out once a week and that was Sunday
evening, everybody always had to go over to the Drive
and walk up to Grant’s Tomb and back. It made her legs
ache to walk so slowly along the crowded streets the way
the Francinis did. All summer she wished for a pair of
rollerskates, but the way the Francinis talked and the way
the nuns talked about dangers made her scared to go out
on the streets alone. What she was so scared of she didn’t
quite know. She liked it, though, helping Agnes and the
Francinis in the bakery.
   That fall she went back to the convent. One afternoon
soon after she’d gone back from the Christmas holidays
Agnes came over to see herj the minute Margie went in
the door of the visitors’ parlor she saw that Agnes’s eyes
were red and asked what was the matter. Things had
changed dreadfully at the bakery. Poor Mr. Francini had
fallen dead in the middle of his baking from a stroke and
Mrs. Francini was going out to the country to live with
Uncle Joe Fisher. “And then there’s something else,”
Agnes said and smiled and blushed. “But I can’t tell you
about it now. You mustn’t think that poor Agnes is bad
and wicked but I couldn’t stand it being so lonely.” Margie
jumped up and down. “Oh, goody, Fred’s come back.”
“No, darling, it’s not that,” Agnes said and kissed her and
went away.                                                         ,          ,
    That Easter Margie had to stay at the convent all
         174

1090
through the vacation. Agnes wrote she didn’t have any
place to take her just then. There were other girls there
and it was rather fun. Then one day Agnes came over to
get her to go out, bringing in a box right from the store a
new darkblue dress and a little straw hat with pink flowers
on it. It was lovely the way the tissuepaper rustled when
she unpacked them. Margie ran up to the dormitory and
put on the dress with her heart pounding, it was the pret-
tiest and grownupest dress she’d ever had. She was only
twelve but from what little she could see of herself in the
tiny mirrors they were allowed it made her look quite
grownup. She ran down the empty greystone stairs, tripped
and fell into the arms of Sister Elizabeth. ^Why such a
hurry?” ^^My mother’s come to take me out on a party
with my father and this is my new dress.” “How nice,”
said Sister Elizabeth, “but you mustn’t . . .” Margie was
already off down the passage to the parlor and was jump-
ing up and down in front of Agnes hugging and kissing
her, “It’s the prettiest dress I ever had.” Going over to
New York on the elevated Margie couldn’t talk about
anything else but the dress,
    Agnes said they were going to lunch at a restaurant
where theatrical people went. “How wonderful. I’ve never
had lunch in a real restaurant. .     . . He must have made
a lot of money and gotten rich.” “He makes lots of
money,” said Agnes in a funny stammering way as they
were walking west along Thirtyeighth Street from the cl-
station.
     Instead of Fred it was a tall dark man with a dignified
manner and a long straight nose who got up from the table
to meet them. “Margie,” said Agnes, “this is Frank Man-
deville.” Margie never let on she hadn’t thought all the
 time that that was how it would be.
    The actor shook hands with her and bowed as if she
 was a grownup young lady. “Aggie never told me she was
such a beauty .  . . what eyes . . . what hair!” he said in

                                                                                175

1091
his solemn voice* They had a wonderful lunch and after-
wards they went to Keith’s and sat in orchestra seats.
Margie was breathless and excited at being with a real
actor. He’d said that the next day he was leaving for a
twelveweeks tour with a singing and piano act and that
Agnes was going with him. ^^And after that we’ll come
back and make a home for my little girl/’ said Agnes.
Margie was so excited that it wasn’t till she was back in bed
in the empty dormitory at the convent that she doped out
that what it would mean for her was she’d have to stay at
the Sisters’ all summer.
    The next fall she left the convent for good and went to
live with Mr. and Mrs. Mandeville, as they called them-
selvesj in two front rooms they sublet from a chiropractor.
It was a big old brownstone house with a high stoop and
steps way west on Seventyninth Street. Margie loved it
there and got on fine with the theater people, all so well-
dressed and citifiedlooking, who lived in the apartments
upstairs. Agnes said she must be careful not to get spoiled,
because everybody called attention to her blue eyes and
her curls like Mary Pickford’s and her pert frozenface
way of saying funny things.
    Frank Mandeville always slept till twelve o’clock and
Agnes and Margie would have breakfast alone quite early,
talking in whispers so as not to wake him and looking out
of the window at the trucks and cabs and movingvans pass-
ing in the street outside and Agnes would tell Margie
about vaudeville houses and onenight stands and all about
how happy she was and what a free and easy life it was
and so different from the daily grind at Broad Channel
and how she’d first met Frank Mandeville when he was
broke and blue and almost ready to turn on the gas. He
used to come into the bakery every day for his breakfast at
two in the afternoon just when all the other customers had
gone. He lived around the corner on Onehundredand-
tourth Street. When he was completely flat Agnes had let
         176

1092
him charge his meals and had felt so sorry for him on
account of his being so gentlemanly about it and out of a
job, and then he got pleurisy and was threatened with t.b.
and she was so lonely and miserable that she didn’t care
what anybody thought,, she’d just moved In with him to
nurse him and had stayed ever since, and now they were
Mr. and Mrs. Mandevllle to everybody and he was mak-
ing big money with his act The Musical Mandevilles. And
Margie would ask about Frank Mandevllle’s partners,
Florida Schwartz, a big hardvoiced woman with titiar
hair, ^^Of course she dyes it,” Agnes said, ^^henna,” and her
son, a horrid waspwalsted young man of eighteen who paid
no attention to Margie at all. The chiropractor downstairs
whom everybody called Indian was Florida’s affinity and
that was why they’d all come to live in his house, ^^Stage-
people are odd but I think they have hearts of gold,”
Agnes would say.
    The Musical Mandevilles used to practice afternoons in
the front room where there was a piano. They played all
sorts of instruments and sang songs and Mannie whose
stage name was Eddy Keller did an eccentric dance and an
imitation of Hazel Dawn. It all seemed wonderful to
Margie, and she was so excited she thought she’d die when
Mr. Mandevllle said suddenly one day when they were all
eating supper brought in from a delicatessen that the child
must take singing and dancing lessons.
      You’ll be wasting your money, Frank,” said Mannie
through a chickenbone he was gnawing.
    ^^Mannie, you’re talking out of turn,” snapped Florida.
    ^^Her father was a great one for singing and dancing in
the old days,” put in Agnes in her breathless timid manner.
    A career was something everybody had in New York
and Margie decided she had one too. She walked down
Broadway every day to her lesson in a studio In the same
building as the Lincoln Square Theater. In October The
Musical Mandevilles played there two weeks. Almost

                                                                               177

1093
every day Agnes would come for her after the lesson and
they’d have a sandwich and a glass of milk in a dairy lunch
and then go to see the show. Agnes could never get over
how pretty and young Mrs. Schwartz looked behind the
footlights and how sad and dignified Frank looked when
he came in in his operacloak.
    During the winter Agnes got a job too, running an
artistic tearoom just off Broadway on Seventysecond Street,
with a Miss Franklyn, a redhaired lady who was a theoso-
phist and was putting in the capital. They all worked so
hard they only met in the evenings when Frank and
Florida and Mannie would be eating a bite in a hurry
before going off to their theater.
    The Musical Mandevilles were playing Newark the
night Margie first went on. She was to come out in the
middle of an Everybody's Dotng It number rolling a
hoop, in a blue muslin dress she didn’t like because it made
her look about six and she thought she ought to look
grownup to go on the stage, and do a few steps of a ragtime
dance and then curtsy like they had taught her at the
convent and run off with her hoop. Frank had made her
rehearse it again and again. She’d often burst out crying in
the rehearsals on account of the mean remarks Mannie
made.
    She was dreadfully scared and her heart pounded wait-
ing for the cue, but it was over before she knew what had
happened. She had run on from the grimy wings into the
warm glittery glare of the stage. They’d told her not to
look out into the audience. Just once she peeped out into
the blurry lightpowdered cave of ranked white faces. She
forgot part of her song and skimped her business and cried
in the dressingroom after the act was over, but Agnes came
round bade saying she’d been lovely, and Frank was smil-
ing, and even Mannie couldn’t seem to think of anything
mean to say; so the next time she went on her heart wasn^t
pounding so hard. Every littlest thing she did got m

1094
answer from the vague cave of faces. By the end of the
week she was getting such a hand that Frank decided to
run the Everybody's Domg It number just before the
finale.
    Florida Schwartz had said that Margery was too vulgar
a given name for the stage, so she was billed as Little
Margo.
    All winter and the next summer they toured on the
Keith circuit, sleeping in pullmans and in all kinds of
hotels and going to Chicago and Milwaukee and Kansas
City and so many towns that Margie couldn’t remember
their names. Agnes came along as wardrobemistress and
attended to the transportation and fetched and carried for
everybody. She was always washing and ironing and heat-
ing up canned soup on an alcohol stove. Margie got to be
ashamed of how shabby Agnes looked on the street beside
Florida Schwartz, Whenever she met other stagechildren
and they asked her who she thought the best matinee idol
was, she’d answer Frank Mandeville.
    When the war broke out The Musical Mandevilles were
back in New York looking for new bookings. One evening
Frank was explaining his plan to make the act a real head-
liner by turning it into a vestpocket operetta, when he and
the Schwartzes got to quarreling about the war. Frank
said the Mandevilles were descended from a long line of
French nobility and that the Germans were barbarian swine
and had no idea of art. The Schwartzes blew up and said
that the French were degenerates and not to be trusted in
money matters and that Frank was holding out receipts
on them. They made such a racket that the other boarders
banged on the wall and a camelfaced lady came up from
the basement wearing a dressinggown spattered with red
and blue poppies and with her hair in curlpapers to tell
them to keep quiet. Agnes cned and Frank in a ringing
voice ordered the Schwartzes to leave the room and not to
 darken his door again, and Margie got an awful fit of

                                                                                179

1095
giggling. The more A.gnes scolded at her the more she
giggled. It wasn’t until Frank took her in the arms of his

rakishlytailored checked suit and stroked her hair and her
forehead that she was able to quiet down. She went to bed
that night still feeling funny and breathless inside with
the whiff of bayrum and energine and Egyptian cigarettes

that had teased her nose when she leaned against his chest.
    That fall it v/as hard times again, vaudeville bookings
were hard to get and Frank didn’t have a partner for his

act. Agnes went back to Miss Franklyn’s teashop and
Margie had to give up her singing and dancing lessons.
They moved into one room, with a curtained cubicle for
Margie to sleep in.
    October was very warm that year. Margie was miserable
hanging round the house all day, the steamheat wouldn’t
turn off altogether and it was too hot even with the win-
dow open. She felt tired all the time. The house smelled
of frizzing hair and beautycreams and shavingsoap. The
rooms were all rented to theater people and there was no
time of the day that you could go up to the bathroom
without meeting heavyeyed people m bathrobes or kimonos
on the stairs. There was something hot and sticky m the
way the men looked at Margie when she brushed past
them in the hall that made her feel awful funny.
    She loved Frank best of anybody. Agnes was always
peevish, in a hurry to go to work or else deadtired just
back from work, but Frank always spoke to her seriously
as if she were a grownup young lady. The rare afternoons
when he was in, he coached her on elocution and told her
stories about the time he’d toured with Richard Mansfield.
He’d give her bits of parts to learn and she had to recite
them to him when he came home. When she didn’t know
them, he’d get very cold and stride up and down and say,
 ^W^ell, it’s up to you, my dear, if you want a career you
 must work for it. ... You have the godgiven gifts .            . .
 but without hard work they are nothing. ... I suppose
          i8o

1096
you want to work in a tearoom like poor Agnes all your

life.”
    Then she’d run up to him and throw her arms round
his neck and kiss him and say, “Honest, Frank, I’ll work
terrible hard.” He’d be all flustered when she did that or
mussed his hair and would say, “Now, child, no hberties,”
and suggest they go out for a walk up Broadway. Some-
times when he had a little money they’d go skating at the

St. Nicholas rink. When they spoke of Agnes they always

called her poor Agnes as if she were a little halfwitted.
There was something a little hick about Agnes.
    But most of the time Margie just loafed or read maga-
zines in the room or lay on the bed and felt the hours

 dribble away so horribly slowly. She’d dream about boys

 taking her out to the theater and to restaurants and what
 kind of a house she would live in when she became a great

 actress, and the jewelry she’d have, or else she’d remember
 how Indian the chiropractor had kneaded her back the

 time she had the sick headache. He was strong and brown
 and wiry in his shirtsleeves working on her back with his

 bigknuckled hands. It was only his eyes made her feel

              eyes like Indian’s would suddenly be looking at
 funny j
 her when she was walking along Broadway, she’d hurry
 and wouldn’t dare turn back to see if they were still look-

 ing, and get home all breathless and scared.
     One warm afternoon in the late fall, Margie was lying

  on the bed reading a copy of the Smart Set Frank had

  bought that Agnes had made her promise not to read. She

  heard a shoe creak and jumped up popping the magazine

  under the pillow. Frank was standing in the doorway look-

  ing at her. She didn’t need to look at him twice to know

  that he’d been drinking. His eyes had that look and there

  was a flush on his usually white face. “Haha, caught you

  that time, little Margo,” he said.

      “I bet you think I don’t know my part,” said Margie,

      “I wish I didn’t know mine,” he said. “Pvc just signed

                                                                                  i8r

1097
the lousiest contract I ever signed in my life. ... The
World will soon see Frank Mandeville on the filthy stage
of a burlesque house.” He sat down on the bed with his

felt hat still on his head and put a hand over his eyes.
^^Godj Pm tired. . , Then he looked up at her with his
eyes red and staring. “Little Margo, you don’t know what

it is yet to buck the world.”
    Margie said with a little giggle that she knew plenty
and sat down beside him on the bed and took his hat off
and smoothed his sweaty hair back from his forehead.
Something inside of her was scared of doing it, but she
couldn’t help it.
    “Let’s go skating, Frank, it’s so awful to be in the house
all day.”
    “Everything’s horrible,” he said. Suddenly he pulled
her to him and kissed her lips. She felt dizzy with the
smell of bayrum and cigarettes and whiskey and cloves
and armpits that came from him. She pulled away from
him. “Frank, don’t, don’t.” He had tight hold of her. She
could feel his hands trembling, his heart thumping under
his vest. He had grabbed her to him with one arm and was
pulling at her clothes with the other. His voice wasn’t like
Frank’s voice at all. “I won’t hurt you. I won’t hurt you,
child. Just forget. It’s nothing. I can’t stand it any more.”
The voice went on and on whining in her ears. “Please.
Please.”
    She didn’t dare yell for fear the people in the house
might come. She clenched her teeth and punched and
scratched at the big wetlipped face pressing down hers.
She felt weak like in a dream. His knee was pushing her
legs apart.
    When it was over, she wasn’t crying. She didn’t care. He
was walking up and down the room sobbing. She got up
and straightened her dress.

‘
  ^ He came over to her and shook her by the shoulders.

1098
      you ever tell anybody Pll kill you, you damn little
brat.  .  .  . Are you bleeding?” She shook her head.
    He went over to the washstand and washed his face,
          couldn’t help it, I’m not a saint. . . . I’ve been
under a terrible strain.”
    Margie heard Agnes coming, the creak of her steps on
the stairs. Agnes was pufHng as she fumbled with the door-
knob. ^^Why, what on earth’s the matter?” she said, coming
in all out of breath.
    “Agnes, I’ve had to scold your child,” Frank was say-
ing in his tragedy voice. “I come in deadtired and find the
child reading that filthy magazine. ... I won’t have it.
... Not while you are under my protection.”
    “Oh, Margie, you promised you wouldn’t. . . . But
what did you do to your face?”
    Frank came forward into the center of the room, pat-
ting his face all over with the towel. “Agnes, I have a con-
fession to make. ... I got into an altercation downtown.
I’ve had a very trying day downtown. My nerves have
all gone to pieces. What will you think of me when I tell
you I’ve signed a contract with a burlesque housed”
    “Why, that’s fine,” said Agnes. We certainly need the
money. . . . How much will you be making?”
    “It’s shameful .    . . twenty a week.”
    “Oh, I’m so relieved ... I thought something terrible
had happened. Maybe Margie can start her lessons again.”
    “If she’s a good girl and doesn’t waste her time reading
trashy magazines.”
    Margie was trembly like jelly inside. She felt herself
breaking out in a cold sweat. She ran upstairs to the bath-^
room and doublelocked the door and stumbled to the
toilet and threw up. Then she sat a long time on the edge
of the bathtub. Ail she could think of was to run away.
    But she couldn’t seem to get to run away. At Christmas
some friends of Frank’s got her a job in a children’s pky.
She made twentyfive dollars a performance and was the

                                                                                183

1099
pet of all the society ladies. It made her feel quite stuckup.
She almost got caught with the boy who played the Knight
doing it behind some old flats when the theater was dark
during a rehearsal.
    It was awful living in the same room with Frank and
Agnes. She hated them now. At night sheM lie awake with
her eyes hot m the stuffy cubicle and listen to them. She
knew that they were trying to be quiet, that they didn’t
want her to hear, but she couldn’t help straining her ears
and holding her breath when the faint rattle of springs
from the rickety old iron bed they slept in began. She
slept late after those nights in a horrible deep sleep she
never wanted to wake up from. She began to be saucy and
spiteful with Agnes and would never do anything she said.
It was easy to make Agnes cry. ^^Drat the child,” she’d
say, wiping her eyes. ^^I can’t do anything with her. It’s
that little bit of success that went to her head.”
    That winter she began to find Indian in the door of his
consultationroom when she went past, standing there
brown and sinewy in his white coat, always wanting to chat
or show her a picture or something. He’d even offer her
treatments free, but she’d look right into those funny blue-
black eyes of his and kid him along. Then one day she
went into the office when there were no patients and sat
down on his knee without saying a word.
    But the boy she liked best in the house was a Cuban
named Tony Garrido, who played the guitar for two
South Americans who danced the maxixe in a Broadway
cabaret. She used to pass him on the stairs and knew all
about it and decided she had a crush on him long before
they ever spoke. He looked so young with his big brown
eyes and his smooth oval face a very light coffeecolor with
a little flush on the cheeks under his high long cheekbones.
She used to wonder if he was the same color all over. He
had polite bashful manners and a low grownup voice. The
first time he spoke to her, one spring evening when she
        184.

1100
was standing on the stoop wondering desperately what she

could do to keep from going up to the room, she knew he
was going to fall for her. She kidded him and asked him
what he put on his eyelashes to make them so black. He

said it was the same thing that made her hair so pretty
and golden and asked her to have an icecream soda witir

him.
    Afterwards they walked on the Drive. He talked Eng-

lish fine with a little accent that Margie thought was very

distinguished. Right away they’d stopped kidding and

he was telling her how homesick he was for Havana and
how crazy he was to get out of New York, and she was

telling him what an awful life she led and how all the men

 in the house were always pinching her and jostling her on

 the stairs, and how she’d throw herself in the river if she

 had to go on living in one room with Agnes and Frank

 Mandeville. And as for that Indian, she wouldn’t let him

 touch her not if he was the last man in the world.
     She didn’t get home until it was time for Tony to go
 downtown to his cabaret. Instead of supper they ate some
 more icecream sodas. Margie went back happy as a lark.

 Coming out of the drugstore, she’d heard a woman say to

 her friend, ^^My, what a handsome young couple.’’
     Of course Frank and Agnes raised Cam. Agnes cried and

 Frank lashed himself up into a passion and said he’d

  punch the damn greaser’s head in if he so much as laid a

  finger on a pretty, pure American girl. Margie yelled out

  that she’d do what she damn pleased and said eve^thing
  mean she could think of. She’d decided that the thing for

  her to do was to marry Tony and run away to Cuba with

  him.
      Tony didn’t seem to like the idea of getting married

  much, but she’d go up to his little hall bedroom as soon

  as Frank was out of the house at noon and wake Tony up

  and tease him and pet him. He’d want to make love to

  her but she wouldn’t let him. The first time she fought

                                                                                  185

1101
him off he broke down and cried and said it was an insult
and that in Cuba men didn’t allow women to act like that.

^It’s the first time in my life a woman has refused my
love.”
    Margie said she didn’t care, not till they were married
and had gotten out of this awful place. At last one after-
noon she teased him till he said all right. She put her hair
up on top of her head and put on her most grownuplook-
ing dress and they went down to the marriagebureau on
the subway. They were both of them scared to death when
they had to go up to the clerk, he was twentyone and she
said she was nineteen and got away with it. She’d stolen
the money out of Agnes’s purse to pay for the license.
    She almost went crazy the weeks she had to wait for
Tony to finish out his contract. Then one day in May,
when she tapped on his bedroom door he showed her two
hundred dollars in bills he’d saved up and said, ^^Today
we get married.   . . . Tomorrow we sail for La ’Avana.
We can make very much money there. You will dance and
I will sing and play the guitar.” He made the gesture of
playing the guitar with the thinpointed fingers of one of
his small hands. Her heart started beating hard. She ran
downstairs. Frank had already gone out. She scribbled a
note to Agnes on the piece of cardboard that had come
back from the laundry in one of Frank’s boiled shirts:

Agnes Darling:
    Don’t be mad. Tony and I got married today and we’re
going to Havana, Cuba, to live. Tell Father if he comes
around. I’ll write lots. Love to Frank.
                                      Your grateful daughter,
                                                                         Margery

    Then she threw her clothes into an English pigskin suit-
case of Frank’s that .he’d just got back from the hockshop
and ran down the stairs thnee at a time. Tony was waiting
for her on the ^stpop, pale md trembling with his guitar-
         xU

1102
case and his suitcase beside him,       do not care for the
money. Let^s take a taxi,” he said.
    In the taxi she grabbed his hand, it was icy cold. At City
Hall he was so fussed he forgot all his English and she
had to do everything. They borrowed a ring from the
justice of the peace. It was over in a minute, and they were
back in the taxi again going uptown to a hotel. Margie
never could remember afterwards what hotel it was, only
that they^d looked so fussed that the clerk wouldn’t believe
they were married until she showed him the marriageli-
cense, a big sheet of paper all bordered with forgetmenots.
When they got up to the room they kissed each other in a
hurry and washed up to go out to a show. First they went
to Shanley’s to dinner. Tony ordered expensive cham-
pagne and they both got to giggling on it.
    He kept telling her what a rich city La ’Avana was and
how the artists were really appreciated there and rich men
would pay him fifty, one hundred dollars a night to play
at their parties, ^^And with you, darling Margo, it will be
two three six time that much.     . . . And we shall rent a
fine house in the Vedado, very exclusive section, and serv-
ants very cheap there, and you will be like a queen. You
will see I have many friends there, many rich men like me
very much.” Margie sat back in her chair, looking at the
restaurant and the welldressed ladies and gentlemen and
the waiters so deferential and the silver dishes everything
came in and at Tony’s long eyelashes brushing his pink
 cheek as he talked about how warm It was and the cool
 breeze off the sea, and the palms and the roses, and parrots
 and singing birds in cages, and how everybody spent
 money in La ’Avana. It seemed the only happy day she’d
 ever had in her life.
     When they took the boat the next day, Tony only had
 enough money to buy secondclass passages. They went over
 to Brooklyn on the el to save taxifare. Margie had to carry

                                                                                187

1103
both bags up the steps because Tony said he had a head-

ache and was afraid of dropping his guitarcase.




                                                        NEWSREEL LIV



        there was nothing significant about the morning’s trading.
The first hour consisted of general buying and selling to even
dp accounts, but soon after eleven o’clock prices did less fluc-
tuating and gradually Armed

            TIMES SQUARE PATRONS LEFT HALF SHAVED

Will Let Crop Rot In Producers’ Hands Unless Prices Drop

                  RUSSIAN BARONESS SUICIDE AT MIAMI

                 *  .  , the Mnd of a girl that men forget
                     Just a toy to enjoy for a while

   Coolidge Pictures Nation Prosperous Under His Policies

             HUNT JEItSEY WOODS FOR ROVING JEOPARD

                   PIGWOMAN SAW SLAYING

        It had to be done and I did it, says Miss Ederle

               FORTY-TWO INDICTED IN FLORIDA DIALS

Saw a Woman Resembling Mrs. Hall Berating Couple Near
                      Murder Scene, New Witness Says

        several hundred tents and other light shelters put up by
campers on a hill south of Front Street, which overlooks
Hempstead Harbor, were laid in rows before the tornado as
grass falls before a scythe                                    ’  '


                  When they flay Here comes the bride
                      Yoidll stand outside
          a88

1104
          3000 AMERICANS FOUND PENNILESS IN PARIS

                      I am a foor girl
                          My fortune's been sad
                       I always was courted
                          By the wagoner^s lad

                  NINE DROWNED IN UPSTATE FLOODS

                             SHEIK SINKING

       Rudolph Valentino, noted screen star, collapsed suddenly
yesterday m his apartment at the Hotel Ambassador. Several
hours later he underwent



                                            ADAGIO DANCER


        The nineteenyearold son of a veterinary in Cas-
tellaneta in the south of Italy was shipped ofF to
America like a lot of other unmanageable young Ital-
ians when his parents gave up trying to handle him, to
sink or swim and maybe send a few lire home by inter-
national postal moneyorder. The family was through
with him. But Rodolfo Guglielmi wanted to make
good.
         He got a job as assistant gardener in Central Park
but that kind of work was the last thing he wanted to
       he wanted to make good in the brightlightsj money
do 5
burned his pockets.
         He hung around cabarets doing odd jobs, sweep-
ing out for the waiters, washing carsj he was lazy
handsome wellbuilt slender goodtempered and vain 5
he was a born tangodancer.
         Lovehungry women thought he was a darling. He
began to get engagements dancing the tango in ball-
                                     he teamed up with a girl named
 rooms and cabarets j
                                                                                189

1105
Jean Acker on a vaudeville tour and took the name of
Rudolph Valentino.
        Stranded on the Coast he headed for Hollywood,
worked for a long time as an extra for five dollars a
dayj directors began to notice he photographed well.
        He got his chance in The Four Horsemen
        and became the gigolo of every woman’s dreams.



        Valentino spent his life in the colorless glare of
klieg lights, in stucco villas obstructed with bricabrac
oriental rugs tigerskins, in the bridalsuites of hotels, in
silk bathrobes in private cars.
        He was always getting into limousines or getting
out of limousines,
        or patting the necks of fine horses.
        Wherever he went the sirens of the motorcyclecops
screeched ahead of him
        flashlights flared,
        the streets were jumbled with hysterical faces,
                                                they stuck out their auto-
waving hands, crazy eyes 5
graphbooks, yanked his buttons off, cut a tail off his
admirablytailored dress suitj they stole his hat and
                                    his valets removed young women
pulled at his necktie j
from under his bed; all night in nightclubs and caba-
rets actresses leching for stardom made sheepseyes at
him under their mascaraed lashes.

       ’ He wanted to make good under the glare of the
milliondollar searchlights
        of El Dorado:
        the Sheik, the Son of the Sheik;
        personal appearances.


        He married his old vaudeville partner, divorced
her, married the adopted daughter of a millionaire,
         190

1106
went into lawsuits with the producers who were debas
ing the art of the screen, spent a million dollars on .ono
European trip;
        he wanted to make good in the brightlights.
        When the Chicago Tnhune called him a pink
powderpuff
        and everybody started wagging their heads over
a slavebracelet he wore that he said his wife had given
him and his taste for mushy verse of which he pub-
lished a small volume called Daydreams and the whis-
pers grew about the testimony in his divorce case that
he and his first wife had never slept together,'
         it broke his heart.
         He tried to challenge the Chicago Tribune to 4
duel;
         he wanted to make good
         in heman twofisted broncobustmg pokerplaying
 stock] uggling America. (He was a fair boxer and had
 a good seat on a horse, he loved the desert like the
 bheik and was tanned from the sun of Palm Spring.)
 He broke down in his suite in the Hotel Ambassador
 in New York: gastric ulcer.


         When the doctors cut into his elegantiymolded
 body they found that peritonitis had begun; the ab-
 dominal cavity contained a large amount of fluid and
 food particles; the viscera were coated with a greenish-
 grey film, a round hole a centimeter in diameter was
 seen in the anterior wall of the stomach; the tissue of
 the stomach for one and onehalf centimeters immedi-
 ately surrounding the perforation was necrotic. The
 appendix was inflamed and twisted against the small

 intestine.
          When he came to from the ether the first thing

                                                                                191

1107
he said was, “Well, did I b<"have like a pink powder-
puff?”



        His expensivelymassaged actor’s body fought peri-
tonitis for six days.
        The switchboard at the hospital was swamped with
calls, all the corridors were piled with flowers, crowds
filled the street outside, filmstars who claimed they
were his betrothed entrained for New York.
        Late in the afternoon a limousine drew up at the
hospital door (where the grimyfingered newspapermen
and photographers stood around bored tired hoteyed
smoking too many cigarettes making trips to the nearest
speak exchanging wisecracks and deep dope waiting for
him to die in time to make the evening papers) and a
woman^ who said she was a maid employed by a dancer
who was Valentmo^s first wife, alighted. She delmered
to an attendant an envelope addressed to the filmstar
and inscribed From Jean, and a package. The package
contained a white counterpane with lace ruffles and the
word Rudy embroidered in the four corners. This was
(accompanied by a pillowcover to match over a blue silk
scented cushion.
        Rudolph Valentino was only thirtyone when he
died.



        His managers planned to make a big thing of his
highlypublicized funeral but the people in the streets
were too crazy.
        While he lay in state in a casket covered with a
cloth of gold, tens of thousands of men, women, and
children packed the streets outside. Hundreds were
trampled, had their feet hurt by policehorses. In the
muggy rain the cops lost control. Jammed masses
         192

1108
stampeded under the clubs and the rearing hoofs of
the horses. The funeral chapel was gutted, men and
women fought over a flower, a piece of wallpaper, a
piece of the broken plateglass window. Showwindows
were burst in. Parked cars were overturned and
smashed. When finally the mounted police after re-
peated charges beat the crowd ofiF Broadway, where
traffic was tied up for two hours, they picked up
twentyeight separate shoes, a truckload of umbrellas,
papers, hats, tornoff sleeves. All the ambulances in
that part of the city were busy carting oflF women who’d
fainted, girls who’d been stepped on. Epileptics threw
fits. Cops collected little groups of abandoned chil-
dren.
        The fascist! sent a guard of honor and the anti-
      ^
fascists drove them ofiF. More rioting, cracked skulls,
trampled feet. When the public was barred from the
undertaking parlors hundreds of women groggy with
headlines got in to view the poor body
         claiming to be exdancingpartners, old playmates,
                                                                           every few
relatives from the old country, filmstars j
minutes a girl fainted in front of the bier and was re-
vived by the newspapermen who put down her name
and address and claim to notice in the public prints.
Frank E. Campbell’s undertakers and pallbearers, dig-
nified wearers of black broadcloth and tackersup of
crape, were on the verge of a nervous breakdown.
Even the boss had his fill of publicity that time.
         It was two days before the cops could clear the
streets enough to let the flowerpieces from Hollywood
be brought in and described in the evening papers.



         The church service was more of a success. The
policecommissioner barred the public for four blocks
round
                                                                               193

1109
         Many notables attended.
         America’s Sweetheart sobbing bitterly in a small
black straw with a black band and a black bow behind,
in black georgette over black with a white lace collar
and white lace cuffs followed the coffin that was
         covered by a blanket of pink roses
         sent by a filmstar who appeared at the funeral
heavily veiled and swooned and had to be taken back
to her suite at the Hotel Ambassador after she had
shown the reporters a message allegedly written by one
of the doctors alleging that Rudolph Valentino had
spoken of her at the end
        as his bridetobe.


        A young woman committed suicide in London.
        Relatives arriving from Europe were met by
police reserves and Italian flags draped with crape.
Exchamp Jim Jeffries said, “Well, he made good.”
The champion himself allowed himself to be quoted
that the boy was fond of boxing and a great admirer
of the champion.
        The funeral train left for Hollywood.
        In Chicago a few more people were hurt trying
to see the coffin, but only made the inside pages.
        The funeral train arrived in Hollywood on page
     of the New York Times.



                                                     NEWSREEL LV


                     THRONGS IN STREETS

               LUNATIC BLOWS UP PITTSBURGH BANK
        194

1110
                 Krishnamurti Here Says His Message Is
                                    World Happiness

                         Close the doors
                              They are coming
                                  Through the windows

AMERICAN MARINES LAND IN NICARAGUA
                         TO PROTECT ALIENS

               PANGALOS CAUGHT, PRISONER IN ATHENS

                 Close the windows
                          They are coming through the door:

Saw Pigwoxnan The Other Says But Neither Can Identity
                                             Accused

                    FUNDS ACCUMULATE IN NEW YORK

        the desire for profits and more profits kept on increasing
and the quest for easy money became well nigh universal. All
of this meant an attempt to appropriate the belongings of others
without rendering a corresponding service

       ^‘Physician’’ Who Took Prominent Part in Valentino
                     Funeral Exposed as Former Convict

                        NEVER SAW HIM SAYS MANAGER

     Close the doors they are coming through the windows
         My God they^re coming through the floor



                                  THE CAMERA EYE (47)


         sirens bloom in the fog over the harbor horns of all

colors everyshaped whistles reach up from the river and

the churn of screws the throb of engines                  bells

                                                                                        195

1111
       the steady broken swish of waves cut by prows out

of the unseen stirring fumblingly through the window

tentacles stretch tingling

       to release the spring

        tonight start out ship somewhere join up sign on the

dotted line enlist become one of

        hock the old raincoat of incertitude (in which you

hunch alone       from the upsidedown image on the retina

painstakingly out of color shape words remembered light

and dark straining

        to rebuild yesterday        to clip out paper figures to

simulate growth        warp newsprint into faces smoothing

and wrinkling in the various barelyfelt velocities of time)

       tonight now        the room fills with the throb and hub-

bub of departure the explorer gets a few necessities to-

gether coaches himself on a beginning

       better the streets       first a stroll         uptown down-

town along the wharves under the el peering into faces in

taxicabs at the drivers of trucks at old men chewing in

lunchrooms at drunk bums drooling puke in alleys

what^s the newsvendor reading? what did the elderly

wop selling chestnuts whisper to the fat woman behind the

picklejars? where is she going the plain girl in a red hat

running up the subway steps and the cop joking the other

cop across the street?     and the smack of a kiss from two

shadows under the stoop of the brownstone house and the

grouchy faces at the streetcorner suddenly gaping black

         196

1112
with yells at the thud of a blow a whistle scampering

feet       the event?

       tonight now

       but instead you find yourself (if self is the bellyaching

malingerer so often the companion of aimless walks) the

jobhunt forgotten         neglected the bulletinboard where

the futures are scrawled m chalk

        among nibbling chinamen at the Thalia

        ears dazed by the crash of alien gongs the chuckle of

rattles the piping of incomprehensible flutes the swing and

squawk of ununderstandable talk           otherworld music

antics postures costumes

        an unidentified stranger

        destination unknown

        hat pulled down over the has he any? face



                                 CHARLEY ANDERSON


    It was a bright metalcolored January day when Charley
went downtown to lunch with Nat Benton. He got to the
broker^s ofiice a little early, and sat waiting in an empty
office looking out through the broad steelframed windows
at the North River and the Statue of Liberty and the bay
beyond all shiny ruffled green in the northwest wind,
spotted with white dabs of smoke from tugboats, streaked
with catspaws and the churny wakes of freighters bucking,
the wind, checkered with lighters and flatboats, carferries,
barges and the red sawedoff passengerferries. A schooner
with grey sails was running out before the wind.

                                                                               197

1113
    Charley sat at Nat Benton’s desk smoking a cigarette
and being careful to get all his ashes in the polished brass
ashreceiver that stood beside the desk. The phone buzzed.

It was the switchboard girl. ^^Mr. Anderson . . . Mr.
Benton asked me to beg you to excuse him for a few more
minutes. He’s out on the floor. He’ll be over right away.”
A little later Benton stuck in the crack of the door his thin
pale face on a long neck like a chicken’s. ^^Hullo, Charley
... be right there.” Charley had time to smoke one more
cigarette before Benton came back.    bet you’re starved.”
^^That’s all right, Nat, I been enjoyin’ the view.”
    ^^V’iew? . . . Sure. . . . Why, I don’t believe I look
out of that window from one week’s end to the other. , . .

Still it was on one of those darned red ferries that old
Vanderbilt got his start. ... I guess if I took my nose
out of the ticker now and then I’d be better off. . . .
Come along, let’s get something to eat.” Going down in
the elevator Nat Benton went on talking. ^Why, you are
certainly a difiicult customer to get hold of.”
   ^^The first time I’ve had my overalls off in a year,” said
Charley, laughing.
   The cold stung when they stepped out of the revolving
doprs. ^^You know, Charley, there’s been quite a little talk
about you fellers on the street. , . . Askew-Merritt went
up five points yesterday. The other day there was a feller
from Detroit, a cracker]ack feller . . . you know the Tern
outfit . .  looking all over for you. We’ll have lunch to-
gether next time he’s in town.”
    When they got to the corner under the el an icy blast of
wind lashed their faces and brought tears to their eyes.
                                             men, errandboys, pretty girl
The street -vras crowded j
stenographers, all had the same worried look and pursed
lips Nat Benton had. ^Tlenty cold today.” Benton was
  asping, tugging at his coatcoUar. ^These steamheated of-
fces soften a feller up.” They ducked into a building and
went down into the warm hotroHs smell of a basement
         198

1114
restaurant. Their faces were still tingling from the cold
when they had sat down and were studying the menucards.
    ^^Do you know,” Benton said, ^TVe got an idea you
boys stand in the way of making a little money out there.”
^Tt’s sure been a job gettin’ her started,” said Charley as
he put his spoon into a plate of peasoup. He was hungry.
^^Every time you turn your back somethin^ breaks down
and everythin^ goes cockeyed. But now IVe got a wonder-
ful guy for a foreman. He’s a Heinie used to work for the
Fokker outfit.”
    Nat Benton was eating rawroastbeef sandwiches and
buttermilk. ^TVe got no more digestion than   . . ^^Than
John D, Rockefeller,” put in Charley. They laughed.
    Benton started talking again. ^^But as I was saying, I
don’t know anything about manufacturing but it’s always
been my idea that the secret of moneymaking in that line
of business was discovering proper people to work for you.
They work for you or you work for them. That’s about
the size of it. After all you fellers turn out the product out
there in Long Island City, but if you want to make the
money you’ve got to come down here to make it.         . . ,

Isn’t that true?”
    Charley looked up from the juicy sirloin he was just
about to cut. He burst out laughing.           guess,” he said.
     man’ud be a damn fool to keep his nose on his draftin’-
board all his life.” They talked about golf for a while,
then when they were having their coffee, Nat Benton said,
^^Charley, I just wanted to pass the word along^ on account
of you being a friend of old Ollie’s and the Humphries
and all that sort of thing . . . don’t you boys sell any of
your stock. If I were you I’d scrape up all the cash you
could get ahold of for a margin and buy up any that’s
around loose. You’ll have the chance soon.”
    ^^You think she’ll keep on risin’?”
    ^^Now you keep this under your hat . . . Merritt and
that crowd are worried. They’re selling, so you can expect

                                                                               X99

1115
a drop. That’s what these Tern people in Detroit are wait-
ing for to get in cheap, see, they like the looks of your

little concern.   .  .  . They think your engine is a whiz.
... If it’s agreeable to you I’d like to handle your brok-
erage account, just for old times’ sake, you understand.”
    Charley laughed. ^^Gosh, I hadn’t pictured myself with
a brokerage account . .  . but by heck, you may be right.”
    ‘T wouldn’t like to see you wake up one morning and
find yourself out on the cold cold pavement, see, Charley.”
   After they’d eaten Nat Benton asked Charley if he’d
ever seen the stockexchange operating. ^Tt’s interesting to
see if a feller’s never seen it,” he said and led Charley
across Broadway where the lashing wind cut their faces
and down a narrow street shaded by tall buildings into a
crowded vestibule. “My, that cold nips your ears,” he said.
“You ought to see it out where I come from,” said Char-
ley. They went up in an elevator and came out in a little
room where some elderly parties in uniform greeted Mr.
Benton with considerable respect. Nat signed in a book and
they were let out through a small door into the visitors’
gallery and stood a minute looking down into a great
greenish hall like a railroadstation onto the heads of a
crowd of men, some in uniform, some with white badges,
slowly churning around the tradingposts. Sometimes the
crowd knotted and thickened at one booth and sometimes
at another. The air was full of shuffle and low clicking
machinesounds in which voices were lost. “Don’t look like
much,” said Nat, “but that’s where it all changes hands.”
Nat pointed out the booths where different classes of stocks
were traded. “I guess they don’t think much about avia-
tion stocks,” said Charley. “No, it’s all steel and oil and
the automotive industries,” said Nat. ^We’ll give ’em a
few years . . . what do you say, Nat?” said Charley bois-
terously.
    Charley went uptown on the Second Avenue el and out
across the Queensboro Bridge. At Queens Plaza he got off

1116
and walked over to the garage where he kept his car, a
Stutz roadster he’d bought secondhand. The trafSc was
heavy and he was tired and peevish before he got out to
the plant. The sky had become overcast and dry snow
drove on the wind. He turned in and jammed on his
brakes in the crunching ash of the yard in front o{ the
office, then he pulled off his padded aviator’s helmet and
sat there a minute in the car after he’d switched off the
motor listening to the hum and whir and clattei of the
plant. ^Hhe sonsabitches are slackenin’ up,” he muttered
under his breath.
    He stuck his head in Joe’s office for a moment but Joe
was busy talking to a guy in a coonskin coat who looked
like a bond salesman. So he ran down the hall to his own
office, said, ^^Hello, Ella, get me Mr. Stauch,” and sat
down at his desk which was covered with notes on blue
and yellow sheets.        hell of a note,’^ he was thinking,
^Tor a guy to be glued co a desk all his life.”
    Stauch’s serious square pale face topped by a brush of
colorless hair sprouting from a green eyeshade was lean-
ing over him. “Sit down, Julius,” he said. “How’s tricks'^

. .   . Burnishin’ room all right?” “Ach, yes, but we haf
two stampingmachines broken in one day.” “The hell you

say. Let’s go look at them.”
    When Charley got back to the office he had a streak of
grease on his nose. He still had an oily micrometer in his
hand. It was six o’clock. He called up Joe. “Hello, Joe,
goin’ home?” “Sure, I was waiting for youj what was the
trouble?” “I was crawlin’ around on my belly in the
grease as usual.”
    Charley washed his hands and face in the lavatoiy and
ran down the rubbertreaded steps. Joe was waiting for him
in the entry. “My wife’s got my car, Charley, let’s take
yours,” said Joe. “It’ll be a bit drafty, Joe.” “We can stand

it.” “Goodnight, Mr. Askew, goodnight, Mr. Anderson,”

                                                                               201

1117
said the old watchman in his blue cap with earflaps^, who
was closing up behind them.
   ^^Say, Charley,” Joe said when they’d turned into the
stream of traffic at the end of the alley. “Why don’t you

let Stauch do more of the routine work? He seems pretty

efficient.” “Knows a hell of a lot more than I do,” said
Charley, squinting through the frosted windshield. The
headlights coming the other way made big sparkling
blooms of light in the driving snow. On the bridge the
girders were already all marked out with neat streaks of
white. All you could see of the river and the city was a
shadowy swirl, now dark, now glowing. Charley had all he
could do to keep the car from skidding on the icy places
on the bridge. “Attaboy, Charley,” said Joe as they slewed
down the ramp into the crosstown street full of golden
light.
   Across Fiftymnth they had to go at a snail’s pace. They
were stiff with cold and it was seven thirty before they
drove up to the door of the apartmenthouse on Riverside
Drive where Charley had been living all winter with the
Askews. Mrs. Askew and two yellowhaired little girls met
them at their door.
    Grace Askew was a bleachedlooking woman with pale
hair and faint crowsfeet back of her eyes and on the sides
of her neck that gave her a sweet crumpled complaining
look. “I was worried,” she said, “about your not having
the car in this blizzard.”
    Jean, the oldest girl, was jumping up and down singing,
^^Snowy snowy snowy, it’s going to be snowy.”
    ^^And, Charles,” said Grace in a teasing voice as they
went into the parlor, that smelt warm of dinner cooking,
to spread their hands before the gaslogs, “if she called up
once she called up twenty times. She must think I’m trying
to keep you away from her.”
    “Who . .     . Doris?”
    Grace pursed up her lips and nodded. “But, Charles,
         902

1118
you’d better stay home to dinner. I’ve got a wonderful leg
of lamb and sweetpotatoes. You ^^now you like ovr dinners
better here than all those fancy fixin’s over there . .
    Charley was already at the phone. “Oh, Charley,” came
Doris’s sweet lisping voice, “I was afraid you'd been
snowed in over on Long Island. I called there but nobody
answered. .  . . I’ve got an extra place . . . IVe got
some people to dinner you’d love to moot. . . . He was
an engmeer under the Czar. We’re all waiting for you.”
“But honestly, Doris, I’m all in.” “This’ll be a change..
Mother’s gone south and we’ll have the house to ourselves.
We’ll wait.    .  .

    “It’s those lousy Russians again,’' muttered Charley as
he ran to his room and hopped into his dinnerclothes.
“Why, look at the loungelizard,” kidded Joe from the
easychair where he was reading the evening paper with his
legs stretched out towards the gaslogs. “Daddy, what’s a
loungelizard intoned Jean. “Grace, would you mind?”
 Charley went up to Mrs. Askew bhishing, with the two
 ends of his black tie hanging from his collar.
    “Well, it’s certainly devotion,” Grace said, getting up
 out of her chair—^to tie the bow she had to stick the tip of
 her tongue out of the corner of her mouth—“on a night
 like this.” “I’d call it dementia if you asked me,” said Joe.
 “Daddy, what’s dementia?” echoed Jean, but Charley was
 already putting on his overcoat as he waited for the ele-
 vator in the fakemarble hall full of sample whiffs of all the
 dinners in all the apartments on the floor.
     He pulled on his woolly gloves as he got into the car.
 In the park the snow hissed under his wheels. Turning out
 of the driveway at Fiftyninth he went into a skid, out of

 it, into it again. His wheels gripped the pavement just be-
 side a cop who stood at the corner beating his arms against
 his chest. The cop glared. Charley brought his hand up to
 his forehead in a snappy salute. The cop laughed.

                                                                                203

1119
^‘Naughty naughtyj” he said and went on thrashing his

arnas.
   When the door o£ the Humphries’ apartment opened
Charley’s feet sank right away into the deep nap of a
Baluchistan rug. Doris came out to meet him. ^^Oh, you
were a darling to come in this dreadful weather/’ she
cooed. He kissed her. He wished she didn’t have so much
greasy lipstick on. He hugged her to him so slender in the
palegreen eveninggown. “You’re the darling/’ he whis-
pered.
    From the drawingroom he could hear voices, foreign
accents, and the clink of ice in a shaker. “I wish we were
goin’ to be alone/’ he said huskily. “Oh, I know, Charley,
but they were some people I just had to have. Maybe
they’ll go home early.” She straightened his necktie and
patted down his hair and pushed him before her into the
drawingroom.
    When the last of Doris’s dinnerguests had gone the
two of them stood in the hall facing each other. Charley
drew a deep breath. He had drunk a lot of cocktails and
champagne. He was crazy for her. “Jesus, Doris, they
were pretty hard to take.” “It was sweet of you to come,
Charley.” Charley felt bitter smoldering anger swelling
                                                                                 .”
inside him. “Look here, Doris, let’s have a talk .    . “Oh,
now we’re going to be serious.” She made a face as she let
herself drop on the settee. “Now look here, Doris . . .
I’m crazy about you, you know that.   . . .”
    “Oh, but, Charley, we’ve had such fun together .         . .
we don’t want to spoil it yet. ... You know marriage
isn’t always so funny. . .      . Most of my friends who’ve
gotten married have had a horrid time.”
    “If it’s a question of jack, don’t worry. The concern’s
goin’ to go big. ... I wouldn’t lie to you. Ask Nat Ben-
ton. Just this after’ he was explainin’ to me how I could
start gettin’ in the money right away.”
    Doris got up and went over to him and kissed him.
         ao4

1120
*^Yes, he was a poor old silly. ... You must think Pm
a horrid mercenary little bitch. I don’t see why you’d want
to marry me if you thought I was like that. Honestly,
Charley, what Pd love more than anything in the world
would be to get out and make my own living. I hate this
plushhorse existence.” He grabbed her to him. She pushed
him away. ^^It’s my dress, darling, yes, that costs money,
not me. ... Now you go home and go to bed like a good
boy. You look all tired out.”
    When he got down to the street, he found the snow
had drifted in over the seat of the car. The motor would
barely turn over. No way of getting her to start. He called
his garage to send somebody to start the car. Since he was
in the phonebooth he might as well call up Mrs. Darling.
^^What a dreadful night, dearie. Well, since it’s Mr. Char-
ley, maybe we can fix something up but it’s dreadfully
short notice and the end of the week too. Well ... in
about an hour.”
    Charley walked up and down in the snow in front of the
apartmenthouse waiting for them to come round from the
garage. The black angry bile was still rising in him. When
they finally came and got her started he let the mechanic
take her back to the garage. Then he walked around to a
speak he knew.
    The streets were empty. Dry snow swished in his face
as he went down the steps to the basement door. The bar
was full of men and girls halftight and bellowing and tit-

tering. Charley felt like wringing their goddam necks. He
drank off four whiskies one after another and went around
to Mrs. Darling’s. Going up in the elevator he began to

feel tight. He gave the elevatorboy a dollar and caught
out of the corner of his eye the black boy’s happy surprised
grin when he shoved the bill into his pocket. Once inside
he let out a whoop. ^^Now, Mr. Charley,” said the colored
girl in starched cap and apron who had opened the doorj

                                                                               205

1121
**you know the missis don’t like no noise . . . and you’re
such a civilspoken young gentleman.”
   ^^Helloj dearie.” He hardly looked at the girl. 'Tut out
the light,” he said. "Remember your name’s Doris. Go
in the bathroom and take your clothes off and don’t forget
to put on lipstick, plenty lipstick.” He switched off the
light and tore off his clothes. In the dark it was hard to
get the studs out of his boiled shirt. He grabbed the boiled
shirt with both hands and ripped out the buttonholes.
"Now come in here, goddam you. I love you, you bitch
Doris.” The girl was trembling. When he grabbed her to
him she burst out crying.
    He had to get some liquor for the girl to cheer her up
and that started him off again. Next day he woke up late
feehng too lousy to go out to the plant, he didn’t want to
     out, all he wanted to do was drink so he hung around
all day drinking gin and bitters in Mrs. Darling’s drapery-
ckoked parlor. In the afternoon Mrs. Darling came in and
played Russian bank with him and told him about how an
operasinger had ruined her life, and wanted to get him to
caper off on beer. That evening he got her to call up the
same girl again. When she came he tried to explain to her
that he wasn’t crazy. He woke up alone in the bed feeling
sober and disgusted.
    The Askews were at breakfast when he got home Sun-
day morning. The little girls were lying on the floor read-
ihg the funny papers. There were Sunday papers on all
the chairs. Joe was sitting in his bathrobe smoking a cigar
over his last cup of coffee. "Just in time for a nice cup of
fresh' coffee,” he said. "That must have been quite a din-
nerparty,” said Grace, giggling. "I got in on a little poker-
game,” growled Charley. When he sat down his overcoai
opened and they saw his tom shirtfront. "I’d say it was
quite a pokergame,” said Joe. "Everything was lousy,”
tod Charley. "I’ll go and wash my face.”
 .'When he came back in his bathrobe and slippers he
         206

1122
began to feel better. Grace got him some counti*y sausage
and hot cornbread. ^^Well, IVe heard about these Park
Avenue parties before but never one that lasted two days.”
^^Oh, lay off, Grace.”
    ‘^^Say, Charley, did you read that article in the financial
section of the Evening Post last night tipping off about a
boom in airplane stocks?” “No . , . but I had a talk with
Nat Benton, you know he’s a broker I told you about, a
friend of Ollie Taylor’s.     . . . Well, he said .       .
    Grace got to her feet. “Now you know if you boys talk
shop on Sundays I leave the room.” Joe took his wife’s
arm and gently pulled her back into her chair. “Just let me
say one thing and then we’ll shut up. ... I hope we keep
out of the hands of the operators for at least five years.
Pm sorry the damned stuff’s listed. I wish I trusted Mer-
ritt and them as much as I do you and me.” “We’ll talk
about that,” said Charley. Joe handed him a cigar. “AH
right, Gracie,” he said. “How about a selection on the vie-
trola?”
    Charley had been planning all winter to take Doris with
him to Washington when he flew down one of the sample
planes to show off some of his patents to the experts at the
War Department, but she and her mother sailed for Eu-
rope the week before. That left him with nothing to do
one springy Saturday night, so he called up the Johnsons.
He’d met Paul on the subway during the winter and Paul
had asked him in a hurt way why he never came down
any more. Charley had answered honestly he hadn’t stuck
his nose out of the plant in months. Now it made him feel
funny calling up, listening to the phone ring and then
Eveline’s teasing voice that always seemed to have a little
jeer in it: What fun, he must come down at once and stay
to supper, she had a lot of funny people there, she said.
    Paul opened the door for him. Paul’s face had a tallowy
look Charley hadn’t noticed before. “Welcome, stranger,”
he said in a forced boisterous tone and gave him a couple

                                                                               207

1123
                                                                                           ”





of pats on the back as he went into the crowded room.
There were some very pretty girls, and young men of dif-
ferent shapes and sizes, cocktailglasses, trays of little things
to eat on crackers, cigarettesmoke. Everybody was talking
and screeching like a lot of lathes in a turningplant. At the
back of the room Eveline, looking tall and pale and beau-
tiful, sat on a marbletopped table beside a small man with
a long yellow nose and pouches under his eyes. ^^Oh, Char-
ley, how prosperous you look. . . . Meet Charles Edward
                                                                                  he’s in
Holden . .     . Holdy, this is Charley Anderson ^
flyingmachines. .  .  . Why, Charley, you look filthy rich.”
^^Not yet,” said Charley. He was trying to keep from
laughing. “Well, what are you looking so pleased about?’
Everybody is just too dreary about everything this after-
noon.”
    “I’m not dreary,” said Holden. “Now don’t tell me I’m
dreary.”
    “Of course, Holdy, you’re never dreary but your re-
marks tend towards murder and suicide.”
    Everybody laughed a great deal. Charley found him-
self pushed away from Eveline by people trying to listen
to what Charles Edward Holden was saying. He found
himself talking to a plain young woman in a shiny grey
hat that had a big buckle set in it like a headlight. “Do
tell me what you do,” she said. “How do you mean'
“Oh, I mean almost everybody here does something,
writes or paints or something.” “Me? No, I don’t do any-
thing like that ... I’m in airplane motors.” “A flyer, oh,
my, how thrilling. ... I always love to come to Eve-
line’s, you never can tell who you’ll meet.          . . . Why,
last time I was here Houdini had just left. She’s wonder-
ful on celebrities. But I think it’s hard on Paul, don’t
you? . . . Paul’s such a sweet boy. She and Mr. Holden
 .  . it’s all so public. He writes about her all the time in
his column. ... Of course I’m very oldfashioned. Most
people don’t seem to think anything of it. . . . Of course
        208

1124
it’s grand to be honest. ... Of course he’s such a celeb-
rity too. ... I certainly think people ought to be honest
about their sexlife, don’t you? It avoids all those dreadful
complexes and things.  . .   . But it’s too bad about Paul,
such a nice cleancut young fellow. . . .”
    When the guests had thinned out a little a Frenchspeak-
ing colored maid served a dinner of curry and rice with lots
of little fixings. Mr. Holden and Eveline did all the talk-
ing. It was all about people Charley hadn’t ever heard of.
He tried to break it up by telling about how he’d been
taken for Charles Edward Holden in that saloon that
time, but nobody listened, and he guessed it was just as
well anyway. They had just come to the salad when
Holden got up and said, “My dear, my only morals con-

sist in never being late to the theater, we must run.” He
and Eveline went out in a hurry leaving Charley and Paul
to talk to a quarrelsome middleaged man and his wife that
Charley had never been introduced to. It wasn’t much use
trying to talk to them because the man was too tight to
listen to anything anybody said and the woman was set on
some kind of a private row with him and couldn’t be got
off it. When they staggered out Charley and Paul were
left alone. They went out to a movmgpicture house for a
while but the film was lousy so Charley went uptown glum
and tumbled into bed.
    Next day Charley went by early for Andy Merritt and
sat with him in the big antisepticlooking diningroom at
the Yale Club while he ate his breakfast. “Will it be
bumpy?” was the first thing he asked. “Weather report
was fine yesterday.” “What does Joe say^” “He said for
us to keep our goddam traps shut an’ let the other guys
do the talkin’.”
    Merritt was drinking his last cup of coffee in little sips.
 “You know Joe’s a little overcautious sometimes. . . . He
 wants to have a jerkwater plant to run himself and hand
 down to his grandchildren. Now that was all very well in

                                                                               209

1125
1 pstate New York in the old days ... but now if a busi-
ness isn’t expanding it’s on the shelf.” “Oh, we’re ex-
pandin’ all right,” said Charley, getting to his feet to fol-
low Merritt’s broadshouldered tweed suit to the door of
the diningroom. “If we weren’t expandin’, we wouldn’t be
at all.”
    While they were washing their hands in the lavatory
Merritt asked Charley what he was taking along for

clothes. Charley laughed and said he probably had a clean

shirt and a toothbrush somewhere. Merritt turned a square
venous face to him: “But we might have to go out. . . .

I’ve engaged a small suite for us at the Waldman Park.
You know in Washington those things count a great deal.”
“Well, if the worst comes to the worst I can rent me a
soup an’ fish.”
    As the porter was putting Merritt’s big pigskin suitcase
and his hatbox into the rumbleseat of the car, Merritt
asked with a worried frown if Charley thought it would
be too much weight. “Hell, no, we could carry a dozen
like that,” said Charley, putting his foot on the starter.
They drove fast through the empty streets and out across
the bridge and along the wide avenues bordered by low
gimcrack houses out towards Jamaica. Bill Cermak had the
ship out of the hangar and all tuned up.
    Charley put his hand on the back of Bill’s greasy leather
jerkin. “Always on the dot. Bill,” he said. “Meet Mr.
Merritt. . . . Say, Andy , . . Bill’s comm’ with us, if
you don’t mind ... he can rebuild this motor out of old
hairpins and chewin’gum if anythin’ goes wrong.”
    Bill was already hoisting Merritt’s suitcase into the tail.
Merritt was putting on a big leather coat and goggles like
Charley had seen in the windows of Abercrombie and
Fitch. “Do you think it will be bumpy.?” Merritt was ask-
ing again. Charley gave him a boost. “May Jbe a little
bumpy over Pennsylvania ... but we ought to be there
in time for a good lunch. . . . Well, gents, this is the first
         210

1126
time iVe ever been in the Nation^s Capital.” ^^Me neither, ^

said Bill. ^^Bill ain’t never been outside of Brooklyn,” sau I
Charley, laughing.
    He felt good as he climbed up to the controls. He put
on his goggles and yelled back at Merritt, You’re in th<
observer’s seat, Andy.”
    The Askew-Merritt starter worked like a dream. The
motor sounded smooth and quiet as a sewingmachine.
^^What do you think of that, Bill?” Charley kept yelling
at the mechanic behind him. She taxied smoothly across
the soft field m the early spring sunshine, bounced a couple
of times, took the air and banked as he turned out across
the slatecolored squares of Brooklyn. The light northwest
wind made a million furrows on the opaque green bay.
Then they were crossing the gutted factory districts of
Bayonne and Elizabeth. Beyond the russet saltmeadows^
Jersey stretched in great fiat squares, some yellow, som^
red, some of them misted with the green of new crops.
    There were ranks of big white cumulus clouds catching
the sunlight beyond the Delaware. It got to be a little
bumpy and Charley rose to seven thousand feet where it
was cold and clear with a fiftymile wind blowing from the
northwest. When he came down again it was noon and the
Susquehanna shone bright blue in a rift in the clouds. Even
at two thousand feet he could feel the warm steam of
spring from the plowed land. Flying low over the farm?
he could see the white fiuff of orchards in bloom. He goi
too far south, avoiding a heavy squall over the head of the
 Chesapeake, and had to follow the Potomac north up to-
 wards the glinting white dome of the Capitol and the shin^
 ing sliver of the Washington Monument, There was no
smoke over Washington. He circled around for a half an
 hour before he found the fiyingfield. There was so much
 green it all looked like fiyingfield.
     “Well, Andy,” said Charley when they were stretching

                                                                                2II

1127
their legs on the turf, ^Vhen those experts see that starter

their eyesll pop out of their heads.”
    Merritt^s face looked pale and he tottered a little as he
walked. ^^Can’t hear,” he shouted.      got to take a leak.”
    Charley followed him to the hangar, leaving Bill to go
over the motor. Merritt was phoning for a taxi. ^^Christ
amighty, am I hungry roared Charley. Merritt winced.
     got to get a drink to settle my stomach first.”
    When they got into the taxi with their feet on Mer-
ntt’s enormous pigskin suitcase, “Pll tell you one thing,
Charley,” Merritt said, ^VeVe got to have a separate cor-
poration for that starter .     .  . might need a separate pro-
ductionplant and everything. Standard Airparts would list
well.”
    They had two rooms and a large parlor with pink easy-
chairs in it at the huge new hotel. From the windows you
could look down into the fresh green of Rock Creek Park.
 Merritt looked around with considerable satisfaction.
 like to get into a place on Sunday,” he said. ^Tt gives you
 a chance to get settled before beginning work.” He added
 that he didn^t think there^d be anybody m the diningroom
 he knew, not on a Sunday, but as it turned out it took them
 quite a while to get to their table. Charley was introduced
 on the way to a senator, a corporation lawyer, the youngest
 member of the House of Representatives and a nephew of
 the Secretary of the Navy. ^Wou see,” explained Merritt,
 ^^my old man was a senator once.”
     After lunch Charley went out to the field again to take
 a look at the ship. Bill Cermak had everything bright as a
 jeweler’s window. Charley brought Bill back to the hotel
 to give him a drink. There were waiters in the hall outside
 the suite and cigarsmoke and a great sound of social voices
 pouring out the open door. Bill laid a thick finger against
 his crooked nose and said maybe he’d better blow. ‘^Gee, it
 does sound like the socialregister. Here, I’ll let you in my
 bedroom an’ I’ll bring you a drink if you don’t mind wait-
          212

1128
ing a sec.” “Sure, it^s all right by me, boss.” Charley
washed his hands and straightened his necktie and went
into the sittmgroom all m a rush like a man diving into a
cold pool.
   Andy Merritt was giving a cocktailparty with dry mar-
tinis, chickensalad, sandwiches, a bowl of caviar, strips of
smoked fish, two old silverhaired gentlemen, three husky-
voiced southern belles with too much makeup on, a fat
senator and a very thin senator in a high collar, a sprin-
kling of pale young men with Harvard accents and a sal-
low man with a gold tooth who wrote a syndicated column
called Capitol Small Talk. There was a young publicity-
man named Savage heM met at Eveline^s. Charley was in-
troduced all around and stood first on one foot and then
on the other until he got a chance to sneak into the bed-
room with two halftumblers of rye and a plate of sand-
wiches. ^^Gosh, ids terrible in there. I don^t dare open my
mouth for fear of puttin^ my foot in it.”
    Charley and Bill sat on the bed eating the sandwiches
and listening to the jmgly babble that came in from the
other room. When he’d drunk his whiskey Bill got to his
feet, wiped his mouth on the back of his hand and asked
what time Charley wanted him to report in the morning.
^^Nine o’clock will do. You sure you don’t want to stick
around? ... I don’t know what to say to those birds
... we might fix you up with a southern belle.” Bill said
he was a quiet family man and would get him a flop and
go to bed. When he left it meant Charley had to go back
to the cocktailparty.
    When Charley went back into Merritt’s room he found
the black eyes of the fat senator fixed on him from be-
tween the two cute bobbing hats of two pretty girls. Char-
ley found himself saying goodby to them. The browneyed
one was a blonde and the blueeyed one had ‘very black
hair. A little tang of perfume and kid gloves lingered after
them when they left. *^^Now which would you say was the

                                                                               213

1129
prettiest, young man?” The fat senator was standing be-
side him looking up at him with a tooconfidential smile.
Charley felt his throat stiffen, he didn’t know why.
^‘They’re a couple of beauties,” he said. ^^They leave you
like the ass between two bundles of hay,” said the fat sena-
tor with a soft chuckle that played smoothly in and out of
the folds of his chin.
    ^^Buridan’s ass died of longing, senator,” said the thin
senator putting the envelope back in his pocket on which
he and Andy Merritt had been doping out figures of some
kind. ^^And so do I, senator,” said the fat one, pushing
back the streak of black hair from his forehead, his loose
jowls shaking. “I die daily. .       .  . Senator, will you dine
with me and these young men? I believe old Horace is
getting us up a little terrapin.” He put a small plump
hand on the thin senator’s shoulder and another on Char-
ley’s. ^^Sorry, senator, the missis is having some friends out
at the Chevy Chase Club.” “Then I’m afraid these young-
sters will have to put up with eating dinner with a pair of
old fogies. I’d hoped you’d bridge the gap between the
generations. . . . General Hicks is coming.” Charley saw
a faint pleased look come over Andy Merritt’s serious
wellbred face. The fat senator went on with his smooth
ponderous courtroom voice. “Perhaps we had better be on
our way. . . . He’s coming at seven and those old war-
horses tend to be punctual.”
    A great black Lincoln was just coming to a soundless
stop at the hotel entry when the four of them^ Charley
and Andy Merritt and Savage and the fat senator, came
out into the Washington night that smelt of oil on asphalt
and the exhausts of cars and of young leaves and of wis-
teriablossoms. The senator’s house was a continuation of his
car, big and dark and faintly gleaming and soundless.
They sprawled in big blackleather chairs and an old white-
haired mulatto brought around manhattans on an engraved
silver tray.

         214.

1130
    The senator took each of the men separately to show
them where to wash up. Charley didn^t much like the little
pats on the back he got from the senator’s small padded
hands as he was ushered into a big oldfashioned bathroom
with a setin marble tub. When he came back from washing
his hands the folding doors were open to the diningroom
and a haleiooking old gentleman with a white mustache
and a slight limp was walking up and down in* front of
them impatiently.        can smell that terrapin, Bowie,” he
was saying. “Ole Horace is still up to his tricks.”
    With the soup and the sherry the general began to
talk from the head of the table. “Of course all this work
with flym’machines is very interestin’ for the advance-
ment of science ... I tell you^ Bowie, you’re one of the
                                                                                      per-
last people in this town who sets a decent table .   .  .
haps It points to vast possibilities in the distant future. . .   .
But speakin’ as a military man, gentlemen, you know some
of us don’t feel that they have proved their worth. . . .
The terrapin is remarkable, Bowie. ... I mean we don’t
put the confidence in the flyin’machine that they seem to
have over at the Navy Department. ... A good glass of
burgundy, Bowie, nothin’ I like so much. , .          . Experi-
ment is a great thing, gentlemen, and I don’t deny that
perhaps in the distant future . .
    “In the distant future,” echoed Savage, laughing, as he
followed Merritt and Charley out from under the stone
portico of Senator Planet’s house. A taxi was waiting for
him. “Where can I drop you, gentlemen? . . . The trou-
ble with us is we are in the distant future and don’t know
it.”
    “They certainly don’t know it in Washington,” said
Merritt as they got into the cab. Savage giggled. “The
senator and the general were pricelessly archaic ,  , . like
something dug up.   .  . . But don’t worry about the gen^
eral . . . once he knows he’s dealing with . . . you know
         presentable people, he’s gentle as Santa Ckus. .   . .
. . .
                                                                               215

1131
He believes in a government of gentlemen, for gentlemen
and by gentlemen.”
   'Well, don't we all?” said Merritt sternly.
    Savage let out a hooting laugh. "Nature's gentlemen

, . . been looking for one for years.” Then he turned his

bulging alcoholic eyes and his laughing pugface to Char-

ley. "The senator thinks you're the whiteheaded boy. .    . .
He asked me to bring you around to see him . .           . the

senator is very susceptible, you know.” He let out another
laugh.
    The guy must be pretty tight, thought Charley. He was
a little woozy himself from the Napoleon brandy drunk
out of balloonshaped glasses they'd finished off the dinner

with. Savage let them out at the Waldman Park and his

taxi went on. "Say, who is that guy, Andy?” "He's a wild
man,” said Merritt. "He is one of Moorehouse's bright
young men. He's bright enough, but I don't like the stories

I hear about him. He wants the Askew-Merritt contract
but we're not in that class yet. Those publicrelations people
will eat you out of house and home.”
    As they were going up in the elevator Charley said,
yawning, "Gee, I hoped those pretty girls were cornin' to
dinner.” "Senator Planet never has women to dinner.   .  . .
He's got a funny reputation.     . .   . There are some funny
people in this town.” "I guess there are,” said Charley. He
was all in, he'd hardly got his clothes off before he was
asleep.
    At the end of the week Charley and Bill flew back to
 New York leaving Andy Merritt to negotiate contracts
 with the government experts. When they'd run the ship
 into the hangar Charley said he'd wheel Bill home to
 Jamaica in his car. They stopped off in a kind of hofbrau
 for a beer. They were hungry and Bill thought his wife
 would be through supper so they ate noodlesoup and
 schnitzels. Charley found they had some fake rhinewine
 and ordered it. They drank the wine and ordered anothet
          216

1132
set of schnitzels. Charley was telling Bill how Andy Mer-
ritt said the government contracts were going through and
Andy Merritt was always right and he’d said it v/as a
patriotic duty to capitalize production on a broad base.
“Billj goddam it, we’ll be in the money. How about an-
other bottle?  . . . Good old Bill, the pilot’s nothin’ with-
out his mechanic, the promotor’s nothin’ without produc-
tion. ... You and me. Bill, we’re in production, and by
God I’m goin’ to see we don’t lose out. If they try to rook
us we’ll fight, already I’ve had offers, big offers from De-
troit ... in five years now we’ll be in the money and I’ll
see you’re in the big money too.”
    They ate applecake and then the proprietor brought out
a bottle of kummel. Charley bought the bottle. ^^Cheaper
than payin’ for it drink by drink, don’t you think so, Bill?”
Bill began to start saying he was a family man and had
better be getting along home. ^^Me,” said Charley, pour-
ing out some kummel into a tumbler, “I haven’t got no
home to go to.  .  . . If she wanted she could have a home.
I’d make her a wonderful home.”
    Charley discovered that Bill Cermak had gone and that
he was telling all this to a stout blonde lady of uncertain
age with a rich German accent. He was calling her Aunt
Hartmann and telling her that if he ever had a home she’d
be his housekeeper. They finished up the kummel and
started drinking beer. She stroked his head and called him
her vandering yunge. There was an orchestra in Bavarian
costume and a thicknecked man that sang. Charley wanted
to yodel for the company but she pulled him back to the
table. She was very strong and pushed him away with big
red arms when he tried to get friendly, but when he
pinched her seat she looked down into her beer and gig-
gled. It was all like back home in the old days, he kept
telling her, only louder and funnier. It was dreadfully
funny until they were sitting in the car and she had her
head on his shoulder and was calling him schatz and her

                                                                               217

1133
long coils of hair had come undone and hung down over
the wheel. Somehow he managed to drive.
    He woke up next morning in a rattletrap hotel in Coney
Island. It was nine o’clock, he had a frightful head and
Aunt Hartmann was sitting up m bed looking pink, broad
and beefy and asking for kaffee und schlagsahne. He took
her out to breakfast at a Vienna bakery. She ate a great
deal and cried a great deal and said he mustn’t think she
was a bad woman, because she was just a poor girl out of
work and she’d felt so badly on account of his being a poor
homeless boy. He said he’d be a poor homeless boy for

fair if he didn’t get back to the ofEce. He gave her all the
change he had in his pocket and a fake address and left
her crying over a third cup of coffee in the Vienna bakery
and headed for Long Island City. About Ozone Park he
had to stop to upchuck on the side of the road. He just
managed to get into the yard of the plant with his last drop
of gas. He slipped into his ofhce. It was ten minutes of
twelve.
    His desk was full of notes and letters held together with
clips and blue papers marked immediate attention. He
was scared Miss Robinson or Joe Askew would find out
he was back. Then he remembered he had a silver flask of
old bourbon in his desk drawer that Dons had given him
the night before she sailed, to forget her by she’d said,
kidding him. He’d just tipped his head back to take a swig
when he saw Joe Askew standing in front of his desk.
    Joe stood with his legs apart with a worn frowning look
on his face. “Well, for Pete’s sake, where have you been?
 We been worried as hell about you.     . . . Grace waited
dinner an hour.”
    ^Why didn’t you call up the hangar?”
    ^^Everybody had gone home. . . . Stauch’s sick. Every-
thing’s tied up.”
    ^^Haven’t you heard from Merritt?”
    ^^Sure . . . but that means we’ve got to reorganize prcn
         218

1134
duction.  . . . And frankly, Charley, that^s a hell of aa
example to set the employees . , . boozing around the
office. Last time I kept my mouth shut, but my god . .
    Charley walked over to the cooler and drew himself a
couple of papercupfuls of water.       got to celebratin^ tliat
trip to Washington last night, . . . After all, Joe, these
contracts will put us on the map. . . , How about havin^
a little drink? Joe frowned. ^^You look like you^d been
having plenty . .     . and how about shaving before you
come into the office? We expect our employees to do it,
we ought to do it too. ... For craps^ sake, Charley, re-
member that the waFs over.’^ Joe turned on his heel and
went back to his own office.
    Charley took another long pull on the flask. He was
mad.       woffit take it,” he muttered, ^^not from him or
anybody else.” Then the phone rang. The foreman of the
assemblyroom was standing in the door. ^Tlease, Mr. An-
derson,” he said.
    That was the beginning of it. From then everything
seemed to go haywire. At eight oYlock that night Charley
hadn’t yet had a shave. He was eating a sandwich and
drinking coffee out of a carton with the mechanics of the
repaircrew over a busted machine. It was midnight and he
was all in before he got home to the apartment. He was al>
ready to give Joe a piece of his mind but there wasn’t an
Askew in sight.
    Next morning at breakfast Grace’s eyebrows were raised
when she poured out the coffee. ^Well, if It isn’t the lost
battalion,” she said.
    Joe Askew cleared his throat. ^^Charley,” he said nerv-
ously,       didn’t have any call to bawl you out like that
... I guess I’m getting cranky in my old age. The plant’s
been hell on wheels all week.”
    The two little girls began to giggle.
    ^^Aw, let It ride,” said Charley.
    ^^Little pitchers, Joe,” said Grace, rapping on the table

                                                                               %i<)

1135
for order.       guess we all need a rest. Now this summer,

Joe, you’ll take a vacation. I need a vacation in the worst
way myself, especially from entertaining Joe’s dead cats.
He hasn’t had anybody to talk to since you’ve been away,
Charley, and the house has been full of dead cats.” “That’s
just a couple of guys I’ve been trying to fix up with jobs.
Grace thinks they’re no good because they haven’t much
social Smalltalk.” “I don’t think, I know they are dead
cats,” said Grace. The little girls started to giggle some
more. Charley got to his feet and pushed back his chair.
    “Cornin’, Joe?” he said. “I’ve got to get back to my
wreckin’crew.”
    It was a couple of weeks before Charley got away from
the plant except to sleep. At the end of that time Stauch
was back with his quiet regretful manner like the manner
of an assisting physician in a hospital operatingroom, and
things began to straighten out. The day Stauch finally
came to Charley’s ofiice door saying, “Production is now
again smooth, Mr. Anderson,” Charley decided he’d knock
off at noon. He called up Nat Benton to wait for him for
lunch and slipped out by the employees’ entrance so that
he wouldn’t meet Joe in the entry.
    In Nat’s office they had a couple of drinks before going
out to lunch. At the restaurant after they’d ordered, he
said, “Well, Nat, how’s the intelligence service going?”
    “How many shares have you got^”
    “Five hundred.”
    “Any other stock, anything you could put up for mar-
gin?”
    “A little. ... I got a couple of grand in cash.”
    “Cash,” said Nat scornfully. “For a rainy day .              . .
stuff and nonsense. . . . Why not put it to work?”
    “That’s what I’m talkin’ about.”
    “Suppose you try a little flyer in Auburn just to get
your hand in.”
    “But how about Merritt?”
         220

1136
                                                                                    1






   ^^Hold your horses. . .    . What I want to do is get you
a httle capital so you can fight those birds on an equal
basis. ... If you don’t they’ll freeze you out sure as
fate.”
    ^^oe wouldn’t,” said Charley.
         don’t know the man personally but I do know men
and there are darn few who won’t look out for number one
first.”
         guess they’ll all rook you if they can.”
         wouldn’t put it just that way, Charley. There are
some magnificent specimens of American manhood in the
business world.” That night Charley got drunk all by him-
self at a speak in the Fifties.
    By the time Dons landed from Europe in the fall
Charley had made two killings in Auburn and was buying
up all the Askew-Merritt stock he could lay his hands on.
At the same time he discovered he had credit, for a new
car, for suits at Brooks Brothers, for meals at speakeasies.
The car was a Packard sport phaeton with a long low cus-
tombody upholstered in red leather. He drove down to
the dock to meet Doris and Mrs. Humphries when they
came in on the "Leviathan, The ship had already docked
when Charley got to Hoboken. Charley parked his car and
hurried through the shabby groups at the thirdclass to the
big swirl of welldressed people chattering round piles of
pigskin suitcases, patentleather hatboxes, wardrobetrunks
with the labels of Ritz hotels on them, in the central part
of the wharfbuilding. Under the H he caught sight of old
Mrs. Humphries. Above the big furcollar her face looked
like a faded edition of Doris’s, he had never before no-
ticed how much.
    She didn’t recognize him for a moment. “Why, Charles
Anderson, how very nice.” She held her hand out to him
without smiling. “This is most trying. Doris of course had
to leave her jewelcase in the cabin. ... You are meeting
someone, I presume.” Charley blushed. “I thought I

                                                                                22

1137
might give you a lift ... I got a big car now. 1 thought

it would take your bags better than a taxi.” Mrs. Hum-
phries wasn’t paying much attention. “There she is. . . .”
She waved a gloved hand with an alligatorskin bag in it.
“Here I am.”
   Doris came running through the crowd. She was flushed
and her lips were very red. Her little hat and her fur were
just the color of her hair. “I’ve got it, Mother .         .  . what
a silly girl.” “Every time I go through this,” sighed Mrs.
Humphries, “I decide I’ll never go abroad again.”
    Doris leaned over to tuck a piece of yellow something
into a handbag that had been opened.
    “Here’s Mr. Anderson, Doris,” said Mrs. Humphries.
    Dons turned with a jump and ran up to him and threw
her arms round his neck and kissed him on the cheek. “You
darling to come down.” Then she introduced him to a red-
faced young Englishman in an English plaid overcoat who
was carrying a big bag of golfclubs. “I know you’ll like
each other.”
    “Is this your first visit to this country?” asked Charley.
    “Quite the contrary,” said the Englishman, showing his
yellow teeth in a smile. “I was born in Wyoming.”
    It was chilly on the wharf. Mrs. Humphries went to sit
in the heated waitingroom. When the young man with the
golfsticks went off to attend to his own bags, Doris said,
“How do you like George Duquesne? He was born here
and brought up in England. His mother comes from peo-
ple in the Doomsday Book. I went to stay with them at
the most beautiful old abbey. ... I had the time of my
life in England. I think George is a duck. The Duquesnes
have copper interests. They are almost like the Guggen-
heiras except of course they are not Jewish. . .       . Why,
Charley, I believe you’re jealous. . . . Silly . . . George
and I are just like brother and sister, really. . . . It’s not
like you and me at all, but he’s such fun.”
    It took the Humphries family a couple of hours to get
         222,

1138
through the customs. They had a great many bags and
Doris had to pay duty on some dresses. When Mrs. Hum-
phries found she was to drive uptown in an open car with
the top down she looked black indeed, the fact that it was
a snafeylooking Packard didn’t seem to help. ^Why, it’s a
regular rubberneck wagon,” said Dons. ^^Mother, this is
fun .   . . Charley’ll point out all the tall buddings.” Mrs.
Humphries was grumbling as, surrounded by handbag-
gage, she settled into the back seat, ^^Your dear father,
Doris, never liked to see a lady riding in an open cab,
much less in an open machine.”
    When he’d taken them uptown Charley didn’t go back
to the plant. He spent the rest of the day till closing at
the Askews’ apartment on the telephone talking to Ben-
ton’s ofEce. Since the listing of Standard Airparts there’d
been a big drop in Askew-Merritt. He was hocking every-
thing and waiting for it to hit bottom before buying.
Every now and then he’d call up Benton and say, ^What
do you think, Nat?”
    Nat still had no tips late that afternoon, so Charley

                                       it came heads. He called up the
spun a coin to decide 3
olEce and told them to start buying at the opening figure
next day. Then he changed his clothes and cleared out
before Grace brought the little girls home from school 5
he hardly spoke to the Askews these days. He was fed up
out at the plant and he knew Joe thought he was a slacker.
    When he changed his wallet from one jacket to the
other he opened it and counted his cash. He had four cen-

turies and some chickenfeed. The bills were crisp and new,
straight from the bank. He brought them up to his nose

 to sniff the new sweet sharp smell of the ink. Before he
 knew what he’d done he’d kissed them. He laughed out
 loud and put the bills back in his wallet. Jesus, he was
 feeling good. His new blue suit fitted nicely. His shoes
 Were shined. He had clean socks on. His belly felt hard

1139
under his belt. He was whistling as he waited for the ele-

vator.
    Over at Doris’s there was George Duquesne saying how
ripping the new buildings looked on Fifth Avenue, ^^Oh,
Charley, wait till you taste one of George’s alexanders,
they’re ripping,” said Doris. ^^He learned to make them
out in Constant after the war. ... You see he was in the
British army. . . . Charley was one of our star aces,
George.”
    Charley took George and Doris to dinner at the Plaza
and to a show and to a nightclub. All the time he was
feeding highpower liquor into George in the hope he’d
pass out, but all George did was get redder and redder in
the face and quieter and quieter, and he hadn’t had much
to say right at the beginning. It was three o’clock and
Charley was sleepy and pretty tight himself before he
could deliver George at the St. Regis where he was stay-
ing. ^^Now what shall we do^” ^‘^But, darling, I’ve got to
go home.” ^^I haven’t had a chance to talk to you. .        .  .

Jeez, I haven’t even had a chance to give you a proper
hug since you landed.” They ended by going to the Co-
lumbus Circle Childs and eating scrambled eggs and bacon.
    Doris was saying there ought to be beautiful places
where people in love could go where they could find pri-
vacy and bed in beautiful surroundings. Charley said he
knew plenty of places but they weren’t so beautiful. ^T’d
go, Charley, honestly, if I wasn’t afraid it would be sordid
and spoil everything.” Charley squeezed her hand hard.
     wouldn’t have the right to ask you, kid, not till we was
married.” As they walked up the street to where he’d
parked his car she let her head drop on his shoulder. ^^Do
you want me, Charley?” she in a little tiny voice. want
you too . .     . but I’ve got to go home or Mother’ll be
making a scene in the morning.”
    Next Saturday afternoon Charley spent looking for a
v^alkup furnished apartment. He rented a livingroom
         224

1140
kitchenette and bath all done in grey from a hennahaired

artist lady in flowing batiks who said she was going to
Capri for six months of sheer beauty, and called up an
agency for a Japanese houseboy to take care of it. Next
day at breakfast he told the Askews he was moving.
    Joe didn^t say anything at first, but after he’d drunk the

last of his cup of coffee he got up frowning and walked a
couple of times across the livmgroom. Then he went to
the window saying quietly, ^^Come here, Charley, I’ve got
something to show you.” He put a hand on Charley’s arm.

.  .  . “Look here, kid, it isn’t on account of me being so
sour all the time, is it? You know I’m worried about the
damn business . .  . seems to me we’re getting in over our
heads . .   . but you know Grace and I both think the
world of you. . .       . I’ve just felt that you were putting

in too much time on the stockmarket. ... I don’t sup-
pose it’s any of my damn business.   . . . Anyway us fel-
 lows from the old outfit, we’ve got to stick together.”
     “Sure, Joe, sure. .  .  . Honestly, the reason I want this
 damn apartment has nothin’ to do with that.    .  . . You’re
 a married man with kids and don’t need to worry about

 that sort of thing ... but me, I got woman trouble.”

     Joe burst out laughing. “The old continental sonofagun,
 but for crying out loud, why don’t you get married?”
     “God damn it, that’s what I want to do,” said Charley,
 He laughed and so did Joe.
     “Well, what’s the big joke?” said Grace from behind

 the coffeeurn. Charley nodded his head towards the little

 girls. “Smokm’room stories,” he said, “Oh, I think you’re
 mean,” said Grace.
     One snowy afternoon before Christmas, a couple of
 weeks after Charley had moved into his apartment, he got

 back to town early and met Doris at the Biltmore. She said,

 ^Tbet’s go somewhere for a drink,” and he said he had

 drinks all laid out and she ought to come up to see the
 funny little sandwiches Taki made all in different colors.

                                                                                 22S

1141
She asked if the Jap was there now. He grinned and shook

his head. It only took the taxi a couple of minutes to get
them around to the converted brownstone house. ^^Why^

isn^t this cozy?” Dons panted a little breathless from the

stairs as she threw open her furcoat. “Now I feel really
wicked.” “But ids not like it was some guy you didn^t
know,” said Charley, “or weren^t fond of.” She let him

kiss her. Then she took off her coat and hat and dropped
down beside him on the windowseat warm from the steam-
heat.
    “Nobody knows the address, nobody knows the phone-
number,” said Charley. When he put his arm around her
thin shoulders and pulled her to him she gave in to him
With a little funny shudder and let him pull her on his
knee. They kissed for a long time and then she wriggled
loose and said, “Charley darling, you invited me here for
a drink.”
    He had the fixings for oldfashioneds in the kitchenette
and a plate of sandwiches. He brought them in and set
them out on the round wicker table. Dons bit into several
sandwiches before she decided which she liked best. “Why,
your Jap must be quite an artist, Charley,” she said.
    “They^re a clever little people,” said Charley.
    “Everything's lovely, Charley, except this light hurts
my eyes.”
    When he switched off the lights the window was bright-
blue. The lights and shadows of the taxis moving up and
down the snowy street and the glare from the stores oppo-
fite made shifting orange oblongs on the ceiling. “Oh, iris
Wonderful here,” said Doris. “Look how oldtimy the
street looks with all the ruts in the snow.”
    Charley kept refilling the oldfashioneds with whiskey.
He got her to take her dress off. “You know you told me
about how dresses cost money,” “Oh, you big silly. . . .
Charley, do you like me a little bit?” “Wharis the use of
talking . . . Pm absolutely cuckoo about you . . . you
         2.26

1142
know I want us to be always together. I want us to get
mar— ‘^Donk spoil everything, this is so lovely, I never
thought anything could be like this.    . .   . Charley, you’re
taking precautions, aren’t you?” ^^Sure thing,” said Char-
ley through clenched teeth and went to his bureau for a
condom.
    At seven o’clock she got dressed in a hurry, said she had
a dinner engagement and would be horribly late. Charley
took her down and put her in a taxi. ^^Now, darling,’^ he
said, ^Ve won’t talk about what I said. We’ll just do it.”
Walking back up the steep creaky stairs he could taste her
mouth, her hair, his head was bursting with the perfume
she used. A chilly bitter feeling was getting hold of him,
like the feeling of seasickness. “Oh, Christ,” he said aloud
and threw himself face down on the windowseat.
    The apartment and Taki and the bootlegger and the
payments on his car and the flowers he sent Doris every
day all ran into more money than he expected every
month. As soon as he made a deposit in the bank he drew

it out again. He owned a lot of stock but it wasn’t paying
dividends. At Christmas he had to borrow five hundred
bucks from Joe Askew to buy Doris a present. She’d told
him he mustn’t give her jewelry, so he asked Taki what he
thought would be a suitable present for a very rich and
beautiful young lady and Taki had said a silk kimono was
very suitable, so Charley went out and bought her a man-
darincoat. Doris made a funny face when she saw it, but
she kissed him with a little quick peck in the corner of the
mouth, because they were at her mother’s, and said in a
singsongy tone, “Oh, what a sweet boy.”
    Mrs. Humphries had as^ed him for Christmas dinner.
The house smelt of tinsel and greens, there was a lot of
tissuepaper and litter on the chairs. The cocktails were
weak and everybody stood around, Nat and Sally Benton,
 and some nephews and nieces of Mrs. Humphries’, and
 her sister Eliza who was very deaf, and George Duquesne

1143
>c^ho would talk of nothing but wintersports, waiting for
the midafternoon dinner to be announced. People seemed
sour and embarrassed, except Ollie Taylor who was just
home from Italy full of the Christmas spirit. He spent
most of the time out in the pantry with his coat off manu-
facturing what he called an oldtime Christmas punch. He
was so busy at it that it was hard to get him to the table
for dinner. Charley had to spend all his time taking care
of him and never got a word with Doris all day. After
dinner and the Christmas punch he had to take Ollie back
to his club. Ollie was absolutely blotto and huddled fat
and whitefaced in the taxi, bubbling ^^Damn good Christ-
mas” over and over again.
    When he’d put Ollie in the hands of the doorman Char-
ley couldn’t decide whether to go back to the Humphries’
where he’d be sure to find Dons and George with their
heads together over some damnfool game or other or to go
up to the Askews’ as he’d promised to. Bill Cermak had
asked him out to take a look at the bohunks in Jamaica but
he guessed it wouldn’t be the thing, he’d said. Charley
said sure he’d come, anyplace to get away from the stuffed-
shirts. From the Penn station he sent a wire wishing the
Askews a Merry Christmas, Sure the Askews would under-
stand he had to spend his Christmas with Doris. On the
empty tram to Jamaica he got to worrying about Doris,
maybe he oughtn’t to have left her with that guy.
    Out in Jamaica Bill Cermak and his wife and theii
elderly inlaws and friends were all tickled and a little bit
fussed by Charley’s turnmg up. It was a small frame house
with a green papertile roof in a block of identical little
houses with every other roof^red and every other roof
green. Mrs. Cermak was a stout blonde a little fuddled
from the big dinner and the wine that had brought bright-
red spots to her cheeks. She made Charley eat some of the
turkey and the plumpudding they’d just taken off tht
table. Then they made hot wine with cloves in it and Bill
         228

1144
played tunes on the pianoaccordion while everybody
danced and the kids yelled and beat on drums and got
underfoot.
   When Charley said he had to go Bill walked to the sta-
tion with him. ^^Say, boss, we sure do appreciate your
comin^ out,” began Bill. “Hell, I ain’t no boss,” said Char-
ley. “I belong with the mechanics .    .  . don’t I, Bill? You
and me, Bill, the mechanics against the world .       .  . and
when I get married you’re cornin’ to play that damned
                                                                 get me, Bill .    .  .
accordeen of yours at the weddin’ . , .
It may not be so long.” Bill screwed up his face and rubbed
his long crooked nose. “Women is fine once you got ’em
pinned down, boss, but when they ain’t pinned down
they’re hell.” “I got her pinned down, I got her pinned
down all right so she’s got to marry me to make an honest
man of me.” “Thataboy,” said Bill Cermak. They stood
laughing and shaking hands on the drafty station platform
till the Manhattan train came in.

    During the automobile show Nat called up one day to
say Farrell who ran the Tern outfit was in town and
wanted to see Charley and Charley told Nat to bring him
around for a cocktail in the afternoon. This time he got
Taki to stay.
    James Yardly Farrell was a roundfaced man with sandy-
gray hair and a round bald head. When he came in the
door he began shouting, “Where is he? Where is he?”
“Here he is,” said Nat Benton, laughing. Farrell pumped
Charley’s hand. “So this is the guy with the knowhow, is

it? I’ve been trying to get hold of you for months . . .
ask Nat if I haven’t made his life miserable.        . . . Look
here, how about coming out to Detroit .     .  . Long Island
City’s no place for a guy like you. We need your knowhoW
out there . . . and what we need we’re ready to pay for.”
    Charley turned red. “I’m pretty well off where I
Mr. FarreU.”

                                                                               229

1145
   -^How much do you
   *^Oh, enough for a young feller.”

   ^We’ll talk about that .       .  , but don’t forget that in a
new industry like ours the setup changes fast. ... We
got to keep our eyes open or we’ll get left.        .  .  . Well,
we’ll let it drop for the time being.        . .   . But I can tell
you one thing, Anderson, I’m not going to stand by and
see this industry ruined by being broken up in a lot of little
onehorse units all cutting each other’s throats. Don’t you
think it’s better for us to sit around the table and cut the
cake in a spirit of friendship and mutual service, and I tell
you, young man, it’s going to be a whale of a big cake.”
He let his voice drop to a whisper.
    Taki, with his yellow face drawn into a thm diplomatic
smile, came around with a tray of bacardi cocktails. ^^No,
thanks, I don’t drink,” said Farrell. ^^Are you a bachelor,
Mr. Anderson?”
    “Well, something like that. ... I don’t guess I’ll stay
that way long.”
    “You’d like it out in Detroit, honestly. . . . Benton
tells me you’re from Minnesota.”
    “Well, I was born in North Dakota.” Charley talked
over his shoulder to the Jap. “Taki, Mr. Benton wants
another drink.”
    “We got a nice sociable crowd out there,” said Farrell.
    After they’d gone Charley called up Doris and asked
her right out if she’d like to live in Detroit after they were
married. She gave a thin shriek at the other end of the
line. “What a dreadful idea .      . . and who said anything
about that dreadful . . . you know, state ... I don’t
like even to mention the horrid word. . . . Don’t you
think we’ve had fun in New York this winter?” “Sure,”
answered Charley. “I guess I’d be all right here if . . .
things were different. ... I thought maybe you’d                  a
change, that’s all. ... I had an offer from a concetti out
there, see.” “Now, Charley, you must promise not to men-
         230

1146
tion anything so silly again.” ‘^Sure ... if you^ll have
dinner with me tomorrow night.” ^^Darling, tomorrow I
couldn’t.” ^^How about Saturday then?^” “All right. I’ll
break an engagement. Maybe you can come by for me
at Carnegie Hall after the concert.” “I’ll even go to the
damn concert if you like.” “Oh, no, Mother’s asked a lot
of old ladies.” She was talking fast, her voice twanging in
the receiver. “There won’t be any room in the box. You
wait for me at the little tearoom, the Russian place where
you waited and got so cross the time before.” “All right,
anyplace. . .   . Say, you don’t know how I miss you when
you’re not with me.” “Do you? Oh, Charley, you’re a
dear.” She rang off.
    Charley put the receiver down and let himself slump
back in his chair. He couldn’t help feeling all of a tremble
when he talked to her on the telephone. “Hey, Taki, bring
me that bottle of scotch. . . . Say, tell me, Taki,” Charley
went on, pouring himself a stiff drink, “in your country

,  .  . is It so damn difficult for a guy to get married?” The
Jap smiled and made a little bow. “In my country every-
thing much more difficult.”
    Next day when Charley got back from the plant he
found a wire from Dons saying Saturday absolutely im-
possible. “Damn the bitch,” he said aloud. All evening he
kept calling up on the phone and leaving messages, but she
was never m. He got to hate the feel of the damn mouth-
piece against his lips. Saturday he couldn’t get any word to
her either. Sunday morning he got Mrs. Humphries on
the phone. The cold creaky oldwoman’s voice shrieked that
Doris had suddenly gone to Southampton for the week-
end. “I know she’ll come back with a dreadful cold,” Mrs.
Humphries added. “Weekends in this weather.” “Well,
goodby, Mrs. Humphries,” said Charley and rang off.
Monday morning when Taki brought him a letter in
Doris’s hand, a -big blue envelope that smelt of her per^

                                                                               231

1147
fume, the minute he opened it he knew before he read it
what It would say.

Charley Dear,
   You are such a dear and Pm so fond of you and do so
want you for a friend [underlined]. You know the silly

life I lead, right now Pm on the most preposterous week-
end and Pve told everybody I have a splitting headache
and have gone to bed just to write to you. But, Charley,
please forget all about weddings and things like that. The
very idea makes me physically sick and besides Pve prom-
ised George Pd marry him in June and the Duquesnes
have a publicrelations counsel—^isn^t it just too silly—^but

his business is to keep the Duquesnes ‘pop^l^i* with the
public and he’s given the whole story to the press, how I
was courted among the Scotch moors and in the old medi-
eval abbey and everything. And that’s why I’m in such a
hurry to write to you, Charley darling, because you’re the
best friend [twice underlined] I’ve got and the only one
who lives in the real world of business and production and
labor and everything like that, which Pd so love to belong
to, and I wanted you to know first thing. Oh, Charley
darling, please don’t think horrid things about me.
    Your loving friend [three times underlined]
                                                                                      D
    Be a good boy and burn up this letter, won’t you?

    The buzzer was rattling. It was the boy from the ga-
rage with his car. Charley got on his hat and coat and went
downstairs. He got in and drove out to Long Island City,
walked up the rubbertreaded steps to his office, sat down
at his desk, rustled papers, talked to Stauch over the
phone, lunched in the employees’ lunchroom with Joe
Askew, dictated letters to the new towhaired stenographer
and suddenly it was six o’clock and he was jockeying his
way through the traffic home.
    Crossing the bridge he had an impulse to give a wrench
         232

1148
to the wheel and step on the gas, but the damn cax
wouldn’t clear the rail anyway, it would just make a nasty
scrapheap of piledup traffic and trucks.
    He didn’t want to go home or to the speakeasy he and
Doris had been having dinner in several times a week
all winter, so he turned down Third Avenue. Maybe he’d
run into somebody at Julius’s. He stood up at the bar.
He didn’t want to drink any more than he wanted to do
anything else. A few raw shots of rye made him feel bet-

ter. To hell with her. Nothing like a few drinks. He was
alone, he had money on him, he could do any goddam
thing in the world.
    Next to Charley at the bar stood a couple of fattish
dowdylooking women. They were with a redfaced man
who was pretty drunk already. The women were talking
about clothes and the man was telling about Belleau Wood.
Right away he and Charley were old buddies from the
A.E.F. “The name is De Vries. Profession . .             . bon-
vivant,” said the man and tugged at the two women until
they faced around towards Charley. He put his arms
around them with a flourish and shouted, “Meet the wife.”
    They had drinks on Belleau Wood, the Argonne, the

St. Mihiel salient, and the battle of Paree. The women
said goodness, how they wanted to go to Hoboken to the
 hofbrau. Charley said he’d take them all m his car. They
sobered up a little and were pretty quiet crossing on the

ferry. At the restaurant in the chilly dark Hoboken street
they couldn’t get anything but beer. After they’d finished
 supper De Vries said he knew a place where they could
get real liquor. They circled round blocks and blocks and
 ended in a dump in Union City. When they’d drunk
 enough to start them doing squaredances the women said
 wouldn’t it be wonderful to go to Harlem. This time the

 ferry didn’t sober them up so much because they had a bot-

 tle of scotch with them. In Harlem they were thrown out

 of a dancehall and at last landed in a nightclub. The bon-

                                                                                233

1149
vivant fell down the redcarpeted stairs and Charley had a
time laughing that off with the management. They ate

fried chicken and drank some terrible gin the colored
waiter sent out for, and danced. Charley kept thinking
how beautifully he was dancing. He couldn^t make out
why he didn’t have any luck picking up any of the high-
yallers.
    Next morning he woke up in a room in a hotel. He
looked around. No, there wasn’t any woman in the bed.
Except that his head ached and his ears were burning, he

felt good. Stomach all right. For a moment he thought
he’d just landed from France. Then he thought of the
Packard, where the hell had he left it^^ He reached for
the phone. ^^Say, what hotel is this?^” It was the McAlpin,
goodmorning. He remembered Joe Turbine’s number and
phoned him to ask what the best thing for a hangover was.
When he was through phoning he didn’t feel so good. His
mouth tasted like the floor of a chickencoop. He went back
to sleep. The phone woke him.       gentleman to see you.”
Then he remembered all about Doris. The guy from Tur-
bine’s brought a bottle of scotch. Charley took a drink of

it straight, drank a lot of icewater, took a bath, ordered up
some breakfast. But it was time to go out to lunch. He
put the bottle of scotch in his overcoat pocket and went
round to Frank and Joe’s for a cocktail.
    That night he took a taxi up to Harlem, He went from
joint to joint dancing with the highyallers. He got in a
fight in a breakfastclub. It was day when he found himself
in another taxi going downtown to Mrs. Darling’s, He
didn’t have any money to pay the taximan and the man
insisted on going up in the elevator while he got the
money. There was nobody in the apartment but the col-
ored maid and she shelled out five dollars. She tried to get
Charley to lie down but he wanted to wnte her out a check.
He could sign his name all right but he couldn’t sign it on

1150
the check. The maid tried to get him to take a bath and
go to bed. She said he had blood all over his shirt.
    He felt fine and was all cleaned up, had been asleep in
a barberchair while the barber shaved him and put an ice-
bag on his black eye, and he had gone back to Frank and
Joe’s for a pickup when there was Nat Benton. Good old
Nat was worried asking him about his black eye and he
was showing Nat where he’d skinned his knuckles on the
guy, but Nat kept talking about the business and Askew-
Merritt and Standard Airparts and said Charley’d be out
on the sidewalk if it wasn’t for him. They had some drinks
but Nat kept talking about buttermilk and wanted Charley
to come around to the hotel and meet Farrell. Farrell
thought Charley was about the best guy in the world, and
Farrell was the coming man m the industry, you could bet
your bottom dollar on Farrell. And right away there was
Farrell and Charley was showing him his knuclde and tell-
ing him he’d socked the guy in that lousy pokergame and
how he’d have cleaned ’em all up if somebody hadn’t
batted him back of the ear with a stocking full of sand.
Detroit, sure. He was ready to go to Detroit any time,
Detroit or anywhere else. Goddam it, a guy don’t like to
stay in a town where he’s just been rolled. And that damn
highyaller had his pocketbook with all his addresses in it.
Papers? Sure. Sign anythin’ you like, anythin’ Nat says.
Stock, sure. Swop every last share. What the hell would a
guy want stock for in a plant in a town where he’d been
rolled in a clipjoint. Detroit, sure, right away. Nat, call a
taxi, we’re goin’ to Detroit.
    Then they were back at the apartment and Taki was
chattering and Nat attended to everything and Farrell was
^ying, ^T’d hate to see the other guy’s eye,” and Charley
could sign his name alJ nght this time. First time he signed

it on the table but then he got it on the contract, and Nat
fixed it all up about swapping his Askew-Merritt stock for
Tern stock and then Nat and Farrell said Charley must be

                                                                               235

1151
sltcpy and Taki kept squeaking about how he had to take
right away a hot bath,
   Charley woke up the next morning feeling sober and
dead like a stiff laid out for the undertaker. Taki brought
him orangejuice but he threw it right up again. He
dropped back on the pillow. He’d told Taki not to let any-
body in, but there was Joe Askew standing at the foot of
the bed. Joe looked paler than usual and had a worried
frown like at the office, and was pulling at his thin blond
mustache. He didn’t smile. ^^How are you coming^^” he
said.
   ^^Soso,” said Charley.
    ^^So It’s the Tern outfit, is it?”

    “Joe, 1 can’t stay in New York now. Pm through with
this burg.”
    “Through with a lot of other things, it looks like to
me,”
    “Joe, honest I wouldn’ta done it if I hadn’t had to get
out of this town .    . . and I put as much into this as you
did, some people think a little more.”
   Joe’s thin lips were clamped firmly together. He started
to say something, stopped himself and walked stiffly out of
the room.
    “Tab,” called Charley, “try squeezin’ out half a grape-
fruit, will you?”



                                                   NEWSREEL LVI


        his first move was to board a fast tram for Miami to see
whetlier the builders engaged m construction financed by his
corporation were speeding up the work as much as they might
and to take a look at things in general

                           Pearly early in the mornkfp
         236

1152
                    LUTHERANS DROP HELL FOR HADES

                                  Oh joy
                         Feel that boat arockin^
                                  Oh^ boy
                         See those darkies jlockvrd
                              What^s that whstle sayin^
                                          All aboard toot toot

         Am REJECTION BLAMED FOR WARSHIP DISASTER

          You^re in Ken-tucky just as sure as you^re born

                                  LINER AFIRE

                 POSSE CLOSING IN ON AIRMAIL BANDITS

                         Down beside the summer sea
                             Along Miami Shore
                         Some one waits alone for me
                             Along Miami Shore

SINCE THIS TIME YESTERDAY NEARLY TWO THOUSAND MEN
                     HAVE CHANGED TO CHESTERFIELDS

          PEACHES FLED WITH FEW CLOTHES

                   Saw a rosebud in a store
                       So Pm gom^ where there^s more
                                  Good-bye blues

        the three whites he has with him appear to be of primitive
Nordic stock. Physically they are splendid creatures They
have fine flaxen hair, blue-green eyes and white skins. The
males are covered with a downlike hair

        Let me lay me down to sleef in Carolina
             With a peaceful pllozv ^neath my weary head
                 For a rolling stone like me there^s nothing finer
                          Oh Lordy what a thrill
                          To hear that whif-foor-will
                                  In Carolina

1153
                              THE CAMERA EYE (48)


       westbound to Havana Puerto-Mexico Galveston out

of Santander (the glassy estuary the feeling of hills hem.'
mmg the moist night an occasional star drips chilly out of

the rainy sky a row of lights spills oiff the muffled shore)

the twinscrews rumble

       at last westbound away from pension spinsters tasty

about watercolors the old men with crocodile eyes hiding

their bloody claws under neat lisle gloves the landscapes

corroded with literature         westbound


               for an old man he is old

                   for an old mm he is grey

               but a young man^s heart is full of love

                   get away old man get c^ay


        at the dinnertable westbound in the broadlit saloon

the amplybosomed broadbeamed la bella cubana in a yel-

low lowcut dress archly with the sharp rosy nail of her

littlest finger points

        the curlyhaired young bucks from Bilbao (louder and

funnier) in such tightwaisted icecreamcolored suits silk

shirts striped ties (westbound to Havana for the sugar-

boom) the rich one has a diamond ring          tooshiny eyes

 look the way her little finger jabs


               hut a young man^s heart is full of love

1154
       she whispers He came out of her cabin when I

was on the way to the bath Why was she giggling in

number sixtysix^ the rich one from Bilbao orders cham-

pagne

        to echo the corks that pop in an artillery salute from

the long table where the Mexican general tall solemnfaced

with a black mustache and five tall solemnfaced bluejowled

sons a fat majordomo and a sprinkling of blank henshaped

ladies who rustle out hurriedly in black silk with their

handkerchiefs to their mouths as soon as we round the cape

where the lighthouse is

        westbound (out of old into new inordinate new unde-

ciphered new) southerly summertime crossing (towards

events) the roar in the ears the deep blue heaving the sun

hot on the back of your hand ^he feel of wet salt on the

handrails the smell of brasspolish and highpressure steam

the multitudinous flickering dazzle of light

        and every noon we overeat hors d^oeuvres drink too

 much wine while gigglingly with rolling eyes la bella to

indicate who slept with who sharply jabs with littlest pin-

sharpened finger

        la juerga

        aias the young buck from Bilbao the one with the dia-

 mond ring suffers amidships (westbound the ancient furies

 follow in our wake) a kick from Venus’s dangerous toe

 retires to bed we take our coffee in his cabin instead of

 the fumoir         the ladies interest themselves m his plight

                                                                                239

1155
       two gallegos loosemouthed frognecked itinerant are

invited up from the steerage to sing to the guitar (Vichy

water and deep song argyrol rhymes with rusihol)



                         si quieres qu^el carro cmte

                             mojele y dejele en rio

                         que desfues de bum moja?o

                             canta cond un sdbPo


        and funny stories a thousand and one Havana nights

the dance of the millions          the fair cubanas a ellas les

gustan los negros

        but stepping out on deck to get a breath of briny

afternoon there’s more to be seen than that rusty freighter

wallowing in indigo         el rubio        the buck from Bilbao

wno has no diamond ring beset with yelling Cubans        la

bella leads with heaving breast a small man with grey side-

burns is pushed out at el rubio they shove at him from

behind

        escandalo

        alternately the contestants argue with their friends
who hold them back         break loose       fly at each other

with threshing arms        are recaptured       pulled apart

        shipsofiicers intervene

        pale and trembling the champions are led away
he or the sideburns to the ladies^ drawingroom      el rubio

^ft to the fumoir

1156
       there we masticate the insults           what was it all

about? no sehor no       el rubio grabs a sheet of the note-

paper of the Compagnie Generale Transatlantique but

fingers refuse to hold the pen          while he twined them

in his long curly hair an unauthorized observer who had

become involved in the broil misspelled glibly to his dic-

tation

        a challenge

        and carried it frozenfaced to the parties in the ladies'

drawingroom        cofio

        then we walk el rubio back and forth across the paL

pitating stern discuss rapiers pistols fencingpractice

        now only the westbound observer appears at meals

el rubio mopes at the end of the bunk of his beclapped

 friend and prepares for doom            the ship^s agog with

 dueltalk until mon commandant a redfaced Breton visits

 all parties and explains that this kind of nonsense is ex-

 pressly forbidden in the regulations of the Compagnie

 Generale Transatlantique and that the musical gallegos

 must go back to the steerage from whence they sprang

 despair

         enter with martial tread mi general expert he says m

 affairs of honor un militar          cono       vamos may he try

 to conciliate the parties

         all to the fumoir where already four champagnebot-

  ties are ranked cozily iced in their whitemetal pails

  cono sandwiches are served      mi general clears up the

                                                                                 24t

1157
misunderstanding something about los negros and las

cubanas overheard in the cabin of the bucks from Bilbao

by listening        vamos down the ventilator many

things were that better were unsaid but in any case honor

insulated by the ventilator was intact gingerly the

champions take each others hands coho palmas som-

breros musica mi general is awarded the ear

        in the steerage the gallegos sing and strum

        el rubio at the bar confides to me       that it was from

la bella of the pink jabbing finger and the dainty ear at

ventilators that he with the diamond ring received the

    and that he himself has fears            coho una puta in-

decente

        arrival in Havana        an opulentlydressed husband in

a panamahat receives la bella        the young bucks from

Bilbao go to the Sevilla-Biltmore and I

        dance of the millions or not lackofmoney has raised

its customary head inevitable as visas

        in the whirl of sugarboom prices in the Augustblister-

ing sun yours truly tours the town and the sugary nights

with twenty smackers fifteen eightfifty dwindling in the

j^aps in search of lucrative

        and how to get to Mexico

        or anywhere

1158
                                          MARGO DOWLING


    Margo Dowling was sixteen when she married Tony.
She loved the trip down to Havana on the boat. It was
                                                                     Tony was. He
very rough but she wasn^t sick a minute 5
turned very yellow and lay in his bunk all the time and
only groaned when she tried to make him come on deck to
breathe some air. The island was in sight before she could
get him into his clothes. He was so weak she had to dress
him like a baby. He lay on his bunk With his eyes closed
and his cheeks hollow while she buttoned his shoes for
him. Then she ran up on deck to see Havana, Cuba. The
sea was still rough. The waves were shooting columns of
spray up the great rocks under the lighthouse. The young
thinfaced third officer whoM been so nice all the trip
showed her Morro Castle back of the lighthouse and the
little fishingboats with tiny black or brown figures in them
swinging up and down on the huge swells outside of it.
The other side the pale caramelcolored houses looked as if
they were standing up right out of the breakers. She asked
him where Vedado was and he pointed up beyond into the
haze above the surf. ^^That’s the fine residential section,”
he said. It was very sunny and the sky was full of big
white clouds.
    By that time they were in the calm water of the harbor
passing a row of big schooners anchored against the steep
hill under the sunny forts and castles, and she had to go
down into the bilgy closeness of their cabin to get Tony up
and close their bags. He was still weak and kept saymg
his head was spinning. She had to help him down the gang-
plank.
    The ramshackle dock was full of beadyeyed people in
white and tan clothes bustling and jabbering. They all
seemed to have come to meet Tony. There were old ladies
in shawls and pimplylooking young men in straw hats and

                                                                               243

1159
 in old gentleman with big bushy white whiskers wearing

- i panamahat. Children with dark circles under their eyes
got under everybody’s feet. Everybody was yellow or cof-
feecolored and had black eyes, and there was one grey-
paired old niggerwoman in a pink dress. Everybody cried
and threw up their arms and hugged and kissed Tony and

ft was a long time before anybody noticed Margo at all.
Then all the old women crowded around kissing her and
staring at her and making exclamations in Spanish about
her hair and her eyes and she felt awful silly not under-
Jtending a word and kept asking Tony which his mother
Was, but Tony had forgotten his English. When he finally
pointed to a stout old lady in a shawl and said la mama
iihe was very much relieved it wasn’t the colored one.
    If this is the fine residential section, Margo said to her-
self when they all piled out of the streetcar, after a long
ride through yammering streets of stone houses full of
dust and oily smells and wagons and mulecarts, into the
blisteringhot sun of a cobbled lane. Pm a milliondollar
Peiress.
    They went through a tall doorway in a scabby peeling
Ipmkstucco wall cut with narrow barred windows that went
bright down to the ground, into a cool rankishsmelling ves-
fibule set with wicker chairs and plants. A parrot in a cage
'Squawked and a fat piggy little white dog barked at Margo
;and the old lady who Tony had said was la mama came
!forward and put her arm around her shoulders and said a
Jot of things in Spanish. Margo stood there standing first
on one foot and then on the other. The doorway was
crowded with the neighbors staring at her with their mon-
^ceyeyes.
    ^^Say, Tony, you might at least tell me what she’s say-
ing,” Margo whined peevishly. “Mother says this is your
Ikonst and you are welcome, things like that. Now you
must say muchas gracias, mama.” Margo couldn’t say any-
^ hing. A lump rose in her throat and she burst out crying.
         244

1160
   She cried some more when she saw their room, a big
dark alcove hung with torn lace curtains mostly filled up
by a big iron bed with a yellow quilt on it that was all
spotted with a brown stain. She quit crying and began to
giggle when she saw the big cracked chambei*pot with roses
on it peeping out from under.
    Tony was sore. ^^Now you must behave very nice,” he
said. “My people they say you are very pretty but not
wellbred.”
    “Aw, you kiss my foot,” she said.
   All the time she was in Havana she lived in that alcove
with only a screen in front of the glass door to the court.
Tony and the boys were always out. They’d never take her
anywhere. The worst of it was when she found she was
going to have a baby. Day after day she lay there all
alone staring up at the cracked white plaster of the ceil-
ing, listening to the shrill jabber of the women in the court
and the vestibule and the parrot and the yapping of tht'

little white dog that was named ICiki. Roaches ran up and
down the wall and ate holes in any clothes that weren’t put
away in chests.
    Every afternoon a hot square of sunlight pressed in
through the glass roof of the court and ran along the edge
of the bed and across the tiled floor and made the alcove
glary and stifling.
    Tony’s family never let her go out unless one of the old
women went along, and then it was usually just to market
or to church. She hated going to the market that was so
filthy and rancidsmelling and jammed with sweaty jostling
negroes and chinamen yelling over coops of chickens and
slimy stalls of fish. La mama and Tia Feliciana and Carna
the old niggerwoman seemed to love it. Church was bet-

ter, at least people wore better clothes there and the tinsel

altars were often full of flowers, so she went to confession
regularly, though the priest didn’t understand the few
Spanish words she was beginning to piece together, and

                                                                               245

1161
she couldn’t understand his replies. Anyway church was
better than sitting all day in the heat and the rancid smells
of the vestibule trying to talk to the old women who never
did anything but fan and chatter, while the little white dog
slept on a dirty cushion on a busted gilt chair and occasion-
ally snapped at a fly.
                                                                                        she
    Tony never paid any attention to her any more 5
could hardly blame him her face looked so redeyed and
swollen from crying, Tony was always around with a mid-
dleaged babyfaced fat man in a white suit with an enor-
mous double gold watchchain looped across his baywindow
whom everybody spoke of very respectfully as el senor
Manfredo. He was a sugarbroker and was going to send
Tony to Paris to study music. Sometimes he’d come and
sit in the vestibule on a wicker chair with his goldheaded
cane between his fat knees. Margo always felt there was
something funny about Senor Manfredo, but she was as
nice to him as she could be. He paid no attention to her
either. He never took his eyes off Tony’s long black lashes*
    Once she got desperate and ran out alone to Central
Park to an American drugstore she’d noticed there one
evening when the old women had taken her to hear the
military band play. Every man she passed stared at her.
She got to the drugstore on a dead run and bought all the
castoroil and quinine she had money for. Going home she
couldn’t seem to go a block without some man following
her and trying to take her arm. “You go to hell,” she’d
say to them in English and walk all the faster. She lost
her way, was almost run over by a car and at last got to
the house breathless. The old women were back and raised
Cain.
    When Tony got home they told him and he made a big
scene and tried to beat her up, but she was stronger than he
was and blacked his eye for him. Then he threw himself
on the bed sobbing and she put cold compresses on his eye
 to get the swelling down and petted him and they were
         246

1162
happy and cozy together for the first time since they’d
come to Havana. The trouble was the old women found
out about how she’d blacked his eye and everybody teased
him about it. The whole street seemed to know and every-
body said Tony was a sissy. La mama never forgave
Margo and was mean and spiteful to her after that.
    If she only wasn’t going to have the baby Margo would
have run away. All the castoroil did was to give her ter-
rible colic and the quinine just made her ears ring. She
stole a sharppointed knife from the kitchen and thought
she’d kill herself with it, but she didn’t have the nerve to
stick it in. She thought of hanging herself by the bedsheet,
but she couldn’t seem to do that either. She kept the knife
under the mattress and lay all day on the bed dreaming
about what she’d do if she ever got back to the States and
thinking about Agnes and Frank and vaudeville shows and
the Keith circuit and the St. Nicholas rink. Sometimes
she’d get herself to believe that this was all a long night-
mare and that she’d wake up m bed at home at Indian’s.
    She wrote Agnes every week and Agnes would some-
times send her a couple of dollars in a letter. She’d saved
fifteen dollars in a little alligatorskin purse Tony had given
her when they first got to Havana, when he happened to
look into it one day and pocketed the money and went out
on a party. She was so sunk that she didn’t even bawl him
out about it when he came back after a night at a rumba-
joint with dark circles under his eyes. Those days she was
feeling too sick to bawl anybody out.
    When her pains began nobody had any idea of taking
her to the hospital. The old women said they knew just
what to do, and two Sisters of Mercy with big white but-
terfly headdresses began to bustle in and out with basins
and pitchers of hot water. It lasted all day and all night
and some of the next day. She was sure she was going to
die. At last she yelled so loud for a doctor that they went
mt and fetched an old man with yellow hands all knobbed
                                                                               H7

1163
With rheumatism and a tobaccostained beard they said was
a doctor. He had goldnmmed eyeglasses on a ribbon that
kept falling off his long twisted nose. He examined her
and said everything was fine and the old women grinning
and nodding stood around behind him. Then the pains
                               she didn’t know anything but the pain.
grabbed her again j
    After it was all over she lay back so weak she thought
she must be dead. They brought it to her to look at but
she wouldn’t look. Next day when she woke up she heard
a thin cry beside her and couldn’t imagine what it was. She
was too sick to turn her head to look at it. The old women
were shaking their heads over something, but she didn’t
care. When they told her she wasn’t well enough to nurse

it and that it would have to be raised on a bottle she didn’t
care either.
    A couple of days passed in blank weakness. Then she
was able to drink a little orangejuice and hot milk and
could raise her head on her elbow and look at the baby
when they brought it to her. It looked dreadfully little.

It was a little girl. Its poor little face looked wrinkled and
old like a monkey’s. There was something the matter with
its eyes.
    She made them send for the old doctor and he sat on
the edge of her bed looking very solemn and wiping and
wiping his eyeglasses with his big clean silk handkerchief.
He kept calling her a poor little nina and finally made her
understand that the baby was blind and that her husband
had a secret disease and that as soon as she was well enough
she must go to a clinic for treatments. She didn’t cry or say
anything but just lay there staring at him with her eyes
hot and her hands and feet icy. She didn’t want him to go,
that was all she could think of. She made him tell her all
about the disease and the treatment and made out to un-
derstand less Spanish than she did, just so that he wouldn’t
go away.
    A couple of days later the old women put on their best
         248

1164
black silk shawls and took the baby to the church to be
christened. Its little face looked awful blue in the middle
of all the lace they dressed it in. That night it turned
almost black. In the morning it was dead. Tony cried and
the old women all carried on and they spent a lot of money
on a little white casket with silver handles and a hearse anc!.
a priest for the funeral. Afterwards the Sisters of Mercy
came and prayed beside her bed and the priest came and
talked to the old women in a beautiful tragedy voice like
Frank^s voice when he wore his morningcoat, but Margo
just lay there in the bed hoping sheM die too, with her
eyes closed and her lips pressed tight together. No matter
what anybody said to her she wouldn’t answer or open her
eyes.
    When she got well enough to sit up she wouldn’t go to
the clinic the way Tony was going. She wouldn’t speak to
him or to the old women. She pretended not to under-
stand what they said. La mama would look into her face
m a spiteful way she had and shake her head and say,
'Toca.” That meant crazy.
    Margo wrote desperate letters to Agnes: for God’s sake
she must sell something and send her fifty dollars so that
she could get home. Just to get to Florida would be
enough. She’d get a job. She didn’t care what she did if
she could only get back to God’s Country. She just said
that Tony was a bum and that she didn’t like it in Havana.
She never said a word about the baby or being sick.
                                                          she was an Americai^
    Then one day she got an idea 3
citizen, wasn’t she? She’d go to the consul and see if they
wouldn’t send her home. It was w’eeks before she could
get out without one of the old women. The first time she
got down to the consulate all dressed up in her one good
dress only to find it closed. The next time she went in the
morning when the old women were out marketing and got
to see a clerk who was a towheaded American collegeboya
My, she felt good talking American again.

                                                                               249

1165
   She could see he thought she was a knockout. She liked
him too but she didn’t let him see it. She told him she was
sick and had to go back to the States and that she’d been
gotten down there on false pretenses on the promise of an
engagement at the Alhambra. “The Alhambra,” said the
clerk. “Gosh, you don’t look like that kind of a girl.”
    “I’m not,” she said.
    His name was George. He said that if she’d married a
Cuban there was nothing he could do as you lost your
ritizenship if you married a foreigner. She said suppose
they weren’t really married. He said he thought she’d said
^he wastft that kind of a girl. She began to blubber and
^aid she didn’t care what kind of a girl she was, she had
to get home. He said to come back next day and he’d see
what the consulate could do, anyway wouldn’t she have tea
y^ith him at the Miami that afternoon.
    She said it was a date and hurried back to the house feel-
ing better than she had for a long time. The minute she
was by herself in the alcove she took the marriagelicense
out of her bag and tore it up into little tiny bits and
dropped it into the filthy yellow bowl of the old water-
closet in the back of the court. For once the chain worked
and every last bit of forgetmenotspotted paper went down
into the sewer.

 ; That afternoon she got a letter from Agnes with a fifty-
 dollar draft on the National City Bank in it. She was so
excited her heart almost stopped beating. Tony was out
gallivanting around somewhere with the sugarbroker. She
wrote him a note saying it was no use looking for her,
^he’d gone home, and pinned it on the underpart of the
pillow on the bed. Then she waited until the old women
had drowsed off for their siesta, and ran out

 ‘ She wasn’t coming back. She just had the clothes she had
my and a few little pieces of cheap jewelry Tony had given
 her when they were first married, in her handbag. She
went to the Miami and ordered an icecreamsoda in Eng-
         aso

1166
iish so that everybody would know she was an American

girl, and waited for George.
    She was so scared every minute she thought she’d keel
over. Suppose George didn’t come. But he did come and
he certainly was tickled when he saw the draft, because he

said the consulate didn’t have any funds for a case like

hers. He said he’d get the draft cashed in the morning and
help her buy her ticket and everything. She said he was a
dandy and then suddenly leaned over and put her hand in

its white kid glove on his arm and looked right into his

eyes that were blue like hers were and whispered, ^^George,
you’ve got to help me some more. You’ve got to help me
hide.  .  .  . I’m so scared of that Cuban. You know they

are terrible when they’re jealous.”
    George turned red and began to hem and haw a little,

but Margo told him the story of what had happened on
her street just the other day, how a man, an armyofficer,
had come home and found, well, his sweetheart, with an-
other man, well, she might as well tell the story the way

 it happened, she guessed George wasn’t easily shocked
 anyway, they were in bed together and the armyofficer
 emptied all the chambers of his revolver into the other
 man and then chased the woman up the street with a

 carvingknife and stabbed her five times in the public

 square. She began to giggle when she got that far and
 George began to laugh. “I know it sounds funny to you

 . . * but it wasn’t so funny for her. She died right there

 without any clothes on in front of everybody.”
     ^Well, I guess we’ll have to see what we can do,” said

 George, ^^to keep you away from that carvingknife.”
     What they did was to go over to Matanzas on the
 Hershey electriccar and get a room at a hotel. They had

 supper there and a lot of ginfizzes and George, who’d told

 her he’d leave her to come over the next day just in time

 for the boat, got romantic over the ginfizzes and the moon-

 light and dogs barking and the roosters crowing. They

                                                                                 251

1167
went walking with their arms round each other down the
quiet chalkycolored moonstruck streets, and he missed the

last car back to Havana. Margo didn’t care about anything
except not to be alone in that creepy empty whitewalled
hotel with the moon so bright and everything. She hked
George anyway.
    The next morning at breakfast he said she’d have to let
him lend her another fifty so that she could go back first-

class and she said honestly she’d pay it back as soon as she
got a job in New York and that he must write to her every
day.
    He went over on the early car because he had to be at
the office and she went over later all alone through the
glary green countryside shrilling with insects, and went in
a cab right from the ferry to the boat. George met her
there at the dock with her ticket and a little bunch of
orchids, the first she’d ever had, and a roll of bills that
she tucked into her purse without counting. The stewards
seemed awful surprised that she didn’t have any baggage,
 so she made George tell them that she’d had to leave
home at five minutes’ notice because her father, who was
a very wealthy man, was sick in New York. She and
George went right down to her room, and he was very
 sad about her going away and said she was the loveliest
girl he’d ever seen and that he’d write her every day too,
but she couldn’t follow what he was saying she was so
scared Tony would come down to the boat looking for hen
    At last the gong rang and George kissed her desperate
 hard and went ashore. She didn’t dare go up on deck until
she heard the engineroom bells and felt the shaking of the
boat as it began to back out of the dock. Out of the port-
 hole, as the boat pulled out, she got a glimpse of a dapper
 dark man in a white suit, that might have been Tony,
 who broke away from the cops and ran yelling and waving
 his arms down to the end of the wharf.
     Maybe it was the orchids or her looks or the story about
          252

1168
her father^s illness, but the captain asked her to fiis table
and all the officers rushed her, and she had the time o£ her
life on the trip up. The only trouble was that she could
only come on deck in the afternoon because she only had
that one dress.
    She’d given George a cable to send so when they got to
New York Agnes met her at the dock. It was late fall and
Margo had nothing on but a light summer dress, so she
said she’d set Agnes up to a taxi to go home. It was only
when they got into the cab that she noticed Agnes was
wearing black. When she asked her why Agnes said Fred
had died in Bellevue two weeks before. He’d been picked
up on Twentythird Street deaddrunk and had died there
without coming to. ^^Oh, Agnes, I knew it ... I had a
premonition on the boat,” sobbed Margo.
    When she’d wiped her eyes she turned and looked at
Agnes. ^Why, Agnes dear, how well you look,” she said.
“What a pretty suit. Has Frank got a job?” “Oh, no,”
said Agnes. “You see Miss Franklyn’s teashops are doing
quite well. She’s branching out and she’s made me man-
ageress of the new branch on Thirtyfourth Street at sev-
entyfive dollars a week. Wait till you see our new apart-
ment just off the Drive. .     . , Oh, Margie, you must have
had an awful time.”
    “Well,” said Margo, “it was pretty bad. His people are
pretty well off and prominent and all that but it’s hard to
get on to their ways. Tony’s a bum and I hate him more
than anything in the world. But after all it was quite an
experience ... I wouldn’t have missed it.”
    Frank met them at the door of the apartment. He
looked fatter than when Margo had last seen him and had
patches of silvery hair on either side of his forehead that
gave him a distinguished look like a minister or an ambas-
sador. “Little Margo. . . . Welcome home, my child.

 . . . What a beautiful young woman you have become.”
 When he took her in his arms and kissed her on the brow,

                                                                                253

1169
she smelt again the smell of bayrum and energine she’d
remembered on him. ^^Did Agnes tell you that I’m going
on the road with Mrs. Fiske^       . .  . Dear Minnie Mad-
dern and I were children together.”
    The apartment was a little dark, but it had a parlor, a
diningroom and two bedrooms and a beautiful big bath-
room and kitchen. ^^First thing I’m goin’ to do,” said
Margo, ^hs take a hot bath, ... I don’t believe I’ve had
a hot bath since I left New York.”
    While Agnes, who had taken the afternoon off from the
tearoom, went out to do some marketing for supper,
Margo went into her neat little bedroom with chintz cur-
tains on the walls and took off her chilly rumpled summer
dress and got into Agnes’s padded dressinggown. Then she
sat back in the morrischair in the parlor and strung Frank
along when he asked her questions about her life in
Havana.
    Little by little he sidled over to the arm of her chair,
telling her how attractivelooking she’d become. Then sud-
denly he made a grab for her. She’d been expecting it and
gave him a ringing slap on the face as she got to her feet.
She felt herself getting hysterical as he came towards her
across the room panting.
   ^^Get away from me, you old buzzard,” she yelled, ^^get
away from me or I’ll tell Agnes all about you and Agnes
and me we’ll throw you out on your ear.” She wanted to
shut up but she couldn’t stop yelling. ‘‘^Get away from me.
I caught a disease down there, if you don’t keep away
from me you’ll catch it too.”
    Frank was so shocked he started to tremble all over.
He let himself drop into the morrischair and ran his long
fingers through his slick silver and black hair. She slammed
her bedroom door on him and locked it. Sitting in there
alone on the bed she began to think how she would never
see Fred again, and could it have been a premonition when
she’d told them on the boat that her father was sick. Tears

         254.

1170
came to her eyes. Certainly she’d had a premonition. The
steamheat hissed cozily. She lay back on the bed that was

so comfortable with its clean pillows and silky comforter,
and still crying fell asleep.




                                                      NEWSREEL LVII



         the psychic removed all clothing before seances at Har-
vard. Electric torches, bells, large megaphones, baskets, all

illuminated by phosphorescent paint, formed the psychic’s equip-
ment
                      My brother's coming
                                                         with fineafples
                           Watch the circus begin

                          IS WILLING TO FACE PROBERS

         the psychic’s feet were not neai the professor’s feet when

his trouser leg was pulled. An electric bulb on the ceiling

flashed on and off. Buzzers rang. A teleplasmic arm grasped

 objects on the table and pulled Dr. B.’s hair. Dr. B. placed

 his nose in the doughnut and encouraged Walter to pull as

hard as possible. His nose was pulled.

                           Altho^ we both agreed to fart
                                   It left a sadness in my heart

                   UNHAPPY WIFE TRIES TO DIE

                             SHEIK DENTIST RECONCILED

                               Financing Only Problem

                         / thought that Vd get along
                                                                         and now
                         I find that I was wrong
                                                                   somehow

      Society Women Seek Jobs in Vain as Maids to Queen

                                                                                         255

1171
                     NUN WILL WED GOB
                               Pm broken hearted

                  QUEEN HONORS UNKNOWN SOLDIER

                        Police Guard Queen in Mob

                  Beneath a dreamy Chinese moon
                      Where love is like a haunting tune

                        PROFESSOR TORTURES RIVAL

 QUEEN SLEEPS AS HER TRAIN DEPARTS

                               Social Strife Brews

             COOLIDGE URGES ADVERTISING

                  I found her beneath the setting sun
                       When the day was done

           Cop Feeds Canary on $500 Rich Bride Left

                        While the twilight deefened
                            The sky above
                            I told my love
                        In o^O’-old Ma-'an-kla'-a^a

ABANDONED APOLLO STILL HOPES FOR RETURN OF WEALTHY
                                         BRIDE



                                          MARGO DOWLING


   Agnes was a darling. She managed to raise money
through the Morris Plan for Margo’s operation when Dr.
Dennison said it was absolutely necessary if her health
wasn’t to be senously impaired, and nursed her the way
she’d nursed her when she’d had measles when she was a
little girl. When they told Margo she never could have
        256

1172
a baby, Margo didn’t care so much but Agnes cried and
cried.
    By the time Margo began to get well again and think of
 getting a job she felt as if she and Agnes had just been
 living together always. The Old Southern Waffle Shop
 was doing very well and Agnes was making seventyfive

                            it was lucky that she did because Frank
 dollars a week 3
 Mandeville hardly ever seemed able to get an engage-
 ment any more, there’s no demand for real entertainment
 since the war, he’d say. He’d become very sad and respect-

 able since he and Agnes had been married at the Littk
 Church Around the Corner, and spent most of his time
 playing bridge at the Lambs Club and telling about the
 old days when he’d toured with Richard Mansfield. After
 Margo got on her feet she spent a whole dreary winter
 hanging around the agencies and in the castingoffices of

musical shows, before Flo Ziegfeld happened to see her
 one afternoon sitting in the outside office in a row of other

 girls. By chance she caught his eye and made a faint ghost
                                                       he stopped and gave her
 of a funny face when he passed 3
                     next day Mr. Herman picked her for first row
 a onceover 3
  in the new show. Rehearsals were the hardest work she’d

  ever done in her life.
      Right from the start Agnes said she was going to see to

  it that Margo didn’t throw herself away with a trashy
  crowd of chorusgirls3 so, although Agnes had to be at
  work by nine o’clock sharp every morning, she always
  came by the theater every night after late rehearsals or

  evening performances to take Margo home. It was only

  after Margo met Tad Whittlesea, a Yale halfback who

  spent his weekends in New York once the football seasoi

  was over, that Agnes missed a single night. The nights
  Tad met her, Agnes stayed home. She’d looked Tad ovei

  carefully and had him to Sunday dinner at the apartment

  and decided that for a millionaire’s son he was pretty

                                                                                 257

1173
steady and that it was good for him to feel some responsi-

bility about Margo,
    Those nights Margo would be in a hurry to give a last

pat to the blond curls under the blue velvet toque and to

slip into the furcape that wasn’t silver fox but looked a

little like it at a distance, and to leave the dusty stuffy
dressingroom and the smells of curling irons and cocoa-
butter and girls’ armpits and stagescenery and to run down
the flight of drafty cement stairs and past old greyfaced
Luke who was in his little glass box pulling on his over-
coat getting ready to go home himself. She’d take a deep
breath when she got out into the cold wind of the street.
She never would let Tad meet her at the theater with the
other stagedoor Johnnies. She liked to find him standing
with his wellpolished tan shoes wide apart and his coonskin
coat thrown open so that you could see his striped tie and
soft rumpled shirt, among people in eveningdress in the
lobby of the Astor.
    Tad was a simple kind of redfaced boy who never had
much to say. Margo did all the talking from the minute
 he handed her into the taxi to go to the nightclub. She’d
keep him laughing with stories about the other girls and
the wardrobewomen and the chorusmen. Sometimes he’d
ask her to tell him a story over again so that he could
remember it to tell his friends at college. The story about
 how the chorusmen, who were most of them fairies, had
put the bitch’s curse on a young fellow who was Maisie
 De Mar’s boyfriend, so that he’d turned into a fairy too^
 scared Tad half to death.        lot of things sure do go on
that people don’t know about,” he said.
     Margo wrinkled up her nose. ^^You don’t know the half
 of it, dearie.’^ ^^But it must be just a story.” ^^No, honestly.
 Tad, that^s how it happened ... we could hear them
 yelling and oohooing like they do down in their dressing-
 room. They all stood around in a circle and put the bitches^
 curse on him. I tell you we were scared.”
          258

1174
   That night they went to the Columbus Circle Childs
for some ham and eggs. ^^Gee, Margo,” said Tad with his
mouth full as he was finishing his second order of butter-
cakes. “I don’t think this is the right life for you.            . .   .
You’re the smartest girl I ever met and damn refined
too.” ^‘^Don’t worry, Tad, little Margo isn’t going to stay
in the chorus all her life.”
    On the way home in the taxi Tad started to make passes
at her. It surprised Margo because he wasn’t a fresh kind
of a boy. He wasn’t drunk either, he’d only had one bottle
of Canadian ale. ^^Gosh, Margo, you’re wonderful. . .       .
You won’t drink and you won’t cuddlecooty.” She gave
him a little pecking kiss on the cheek. ^^You ought to un-
derstand, Tad,” she said, ^T’ve got to keep my mind oil
my work.”
         guess you think I’m just a dumb cluck.”
    ^^You’re a nice boy, Tad, but I like you best when you
keep your hands in your pockets.”
    ^^Oh, you’re marvelous,” sighed Tad, looking at hei
with round eyes from out of his turnedup fuzzy collar
from his own side of the cab. ^^Just a woman men forget,
she said.
    Having Tad to Sunday dinner got to be a regular
thing. He’d come early to help Agnes lay the table, and
take oif his coat and roll up his shirtsleeves afterwards to
help with the dishes, and then all four of them would play
hearts and each drink a glass of beefironandwine tonic
from the drugstore. Margo hated those Sunday afternoons
but Frank and Agnes seemed to love them, and Tad would
stay till the last minute before he had to rush off to meet
his father at the Metropolitan Club, saying he’d never
had such a good time in his life.
    One snowy Sunday afternoon when Margo had slipped
away from the cardtable saying she had a headache and
had lain on the bed all afternoon listening to the hissing
of the steamheat almost crying from restlessness and bore-
                                                                               n59

1175
ifojT/; /ignes said with her eyes shining when she came in

in h?/ negligee after Tad was gone, ^^Margo, youVe got to
marry him. He’s the sweetest boy. He was telling us how
this place is the first time in his life he’s ever had any
feeling of home. He’s been brought up by servants and
tidingmasters and people like that. ... I never thought
a millionaire could be such a dear. I just think he’s a
darling.”
    ^‘He’s no millionaire,” said Margo, pouting.
    ^^His old man has a seat on the stockexchange,” called
Frank from the other room. ^^You don’t buy them with
dgarstore coupons, do you, dear child
    “Well,” said Margo, stretching and yawning, “I cer-
tainly wouldn’t be getting a spendthrift for a husband.

.  . Then she sat up and shook her finger at Agnes. “I
can tell you right now why he likes to come here Sundays.
He gets a free meal and it don’t cost him a cent.”


    Jerry Herman, the yellowfaced bald shriveledup little
castingdirector, was a man all the girls were scared to
death of. When Regina Riggs said she’d seen Margo hav-
ing a meal with him at Keene’s Chophouse between per-
formances, one Saturday, the girls never quit talking about

it. It made Margo sore and gave her a sick feeling in the
pit of her stomach to hear them giggling and whispering
behind her back in the dressmgroom.
    Regina Riggs, a broadfaced girl from Oklahoma whose
real given name was Queeme and who’d been in the Zieg-
feld choruses since the days when they had horsecars on
Broadway, took Margo’s arm when they were going down
the stairs side by side after a morning rehearsal. “Look
here, kiddo,” she said, “I just want to tip you off about
that guy, see? You know me, I been through the mill an’
I don’t give a hoot in hell for any of ’em ... but let me
tell you somethin’. There never been a girl got a spoken
word by givin’ that fourflusher a lay. Plenty of ’em have
         260

1176
tried it. Maybe Pve tried it myself. You can’t beat the
game with that guy an’ a beautiful white body’s about the
cheapest thing there is in this town. ... You got a kinda
peart innocent look and I thought I’d put you wise.”
    Margo opened her blue eyes wide. “Why, the idea.

. .   . What made you think I’d . . .” She began to titter

like a schoolgirl. “All right, baby, let it ride. ... I guess
you’ll hold out for the weddin’bells.” They both laughed.
They were always good friends after that.
    But not even Queenie knew about it when after a long
wearing rehearsal late one Saturday night of a new num-
ber that was coming in the next Monday, Margo found
herself stepping into Jerry Herman’s roadster. He said

he’d drive her home, but when they reached Columbus

Circle, he said wouldn’t she drive out to his farm in Con-

necticut with him and have a real rest. Margo went into

a drugstore and phoned Agnes that there’d be rehearsals

 all day Sunday and that she’d stay down at Queenie
 Riggs’s flat that was nearer the theater. Driving out, Jerry
 kept asking Margo about herself. “There’s something dif-

 ferent about you, little girl,” he said. “I bet you don’t tell

 all you know. .    .  . You’ve got mystery.”
     All the way out Margo was telling about her early life

 on a Cuban sugarplantation and her father’s great town-
 house in the Vedado and Cuban music and dances, and
 how her father had been ruined by the suprtrust and

 she’d supported the family as a child actress in Christmas
 pantomimes in England and about her early unfortunate
 marriage with a Spanish nobleman, and how all that life

 was over now and alJ she cared about was her work. “Well,

 that story would make great publicity,” was what Jerry
 Herman said about it.
     When they drew up at a lighted farmhouse under a lot

  of tall trees, they sat in the car a moment, shivering a little

 in the chilly mist that came from a brook somewhere. He’
  turned to her in the dark and seemed to be trying to loof

                                                                                 261

1177
in her face. ^^You know about the three monkeys, dear?"'^
^^Sure,” said Margo. ^^See no evil, hear no evil, speak no
evil.” ^^Correct,” he said. Then she let him kiss her.
    Inside it was the prettiest farmhouse with a roaring fire
and two men in checked lumberman’s shirts and a couple
of funnylooking women in Paris clothes with Park Avenue
voices who turned out to be in the decorating business. The
two men were scenic artists. Jerry cooked up ham and eggs
in the kitchen for everybody and they drank hard cider
and had quite a time, though Margo didn’t quite know
how to behave. To have something to do she got hold of
a guitar that was hanging on the wall and picked out
Siboney and some other Cuban songs Tony had taught her.
    When one of the women said something about how she
ought to do a Cuban specialty her heart almost stopped
beating. Blue daylight was coming through the mist out-
side of the windows before they got to bed. They all had
a fine country breakfast giggling and kidding in their
dressinggowns and Sunday afternoon Jerry drove her in
to town and let her out on the Drive near Seventyninth
Street.
    Frank and Agnes were in a great stew when she got
home. Tad had been calling up all day. He’d been to the
theater and found out that there weren’t any rehearsals
called. Margo said spitefully that she had been rehearsing
a little specialty and that if any young collegeboy thought
he could interfere with her career he had another think
coming. The next weekend when he called up she wouldn’t
see him.
    But a week later when she came out of her room about
two o’clock on Sunday afternoon just In time for Agnes’s
big Sunday dinner. Tad was sitting there hanging his head,
with his hick hands dangling between his knees. On the
chair beside him was a green florist’s box that she knew
when she looked at it was American Beauty roses. He
jumped up. ^'Oh, Margo . . . don’t be sore ... I just

1178
can^t seem to have a good time going around without you.’’
^^Pm not sore, Tad,” she said.        just want everybody to
understand that I won’t let my life interfere with my
work.”
    ^^Sure, I get you,” said Tad.
   Agnes came forward all smiles and put the roses in
water. ^^Gosh, I forgot,” said Tad and pulled a redleather
case out of his pocket. He was stuttering. ^^You see,
D-d~dad g-g~gave me some s-s-stocks to play around with
an’ I made a little killing last week and I bought these,
only we can’t wear them except when we both go out to-
gether, can we?” It was a string of pearls, small and not
very well matched, but pearls all right.
    ^^Who else would take me anyplace where I could wear
them, you mut?” said Margo. Margo felt herself blush-
ing. ^^And they’re not Teclasr*” Tad shook his head. She
threw her arms around his neck and kissed him.
    ^^Gosh, you honestly like them,” said Tad, talking fast.
^Well, there’s one other thing .     . . Dad’s letting me have
the Antoinette^ that’s his boat, you know, for a two weeks’
cruise this summer with my own crowd. I want you and
Mrs. Mandeville to come. I’d ask Mr. Mandeville too
but    . .”

    “Nonsense,” said Agnes. “I’m sure the party will be
properly chaperoned without me. . . . I’d just get sea-

sick. ... It used to be terrible when poor Fred used to
take me out fishing.”
    “That was my father,” said Margo. “He loved being
out on the water .     .  . yachting . . . that kind of thing.
... I guess that’s why I’m such a good sailor.”
    “That’s great,” said Tad.
    At that minute Frank Mandeville came in from his
Sunday walk, dressed in his morningcoat and carrying a
silverheaded cane, and Agnes ran into the kitchenette to
dish up the roast stuffed veal and vegetables and the straw-

                                                                                 263

1179
berrypie from which warm spicy smells had been seeping
through the air of the small apartment for some time.
    “Gosh, I like it here/’ said Tad, leaning back in his chair

after they’d sat down to dinner.
   The rest of that spring Margo had quite a time keeping
Tad and Jerry from bumping into each other. She and
Jerry never saw each other at the theater^ early m the
game she’d told him she had no intention of letting her

life interfere with her work and he’d looked sharply at
her with his shrewd boiledlooking eyes and said, “Humph
... I wish more of our young ladies felt like you do.
... I spend most of my time combing them out of my
hair.”
    “Too bad about you,” said Margo. “The Valentino of
the castingoffice.” She liked Jerry Herman well enough.
He was full of dope about the theater business. The only
trouble was that when they got confidential he began mak-
ing Margo pay her share of the check at restaurants and
showed her pictures of his wife and children in New
Rochelle. She worked hard on the Cuban songs, but noth-
ing ever came of the specialty.
    In May the show went on the road. For a long time
she couldn’t decide whether to go or not. Queenie Riggs
said absolutely not. It was all right for her, who didn’t
have any ambition any more except to pick her off a travel-
ingman in a onehorse town and marry him before he
sobered up, but for Margo Dowling who had a career
ahead of her, nothing doing. Better be at liberty all sum-
mer than a chorine on the road.
    Jerry Herman was sore as a crab when she wouldn’t sign
the roadcontract. He blew up right in front of the office-
force and all the girls waiting in line and everything. “All
right, I seen it coming . ,     . now she’s got a swelled head
and thinks she’s Peggy Joyce. . .          . All right, I’m
through.”
    Margo looked him straight in the eye. ^^You must have

1180
me confused with somebody else, Mr. Herman. Pm saic

1 never started anything for you to be through with.” All
the girls were tittering when she walked out, and Jerry
Herman looked at her like he wanted to choke her. It
meant no more jobs m any company where he did the
casting.
    She spent the summer in the hot city hanging round
Agnes’s apartment with nothing to do. And there was
Frank always waiting to make a pass at her, so that she had
to lock her door when she went to bed. She’d lie around all
day in the horrid stuffy little room with furry green wall-
paper and an unwashed window that looked out on cindery
backyards and a couple of ailanthustrees and always wash-
ing hung out. Tad had gone to Canada as soon as college
was over. She spent the days reading magazines and mon-
keying with her hair and manicuring her fingernails and
dreaming about how she could get out of this miserable
sordid life. Sordid was a word she’d just picked up. It
was in her mind all the time, sordid, sordid, sordid. She
decided she was crazy about Tad Whittlesea.
   When August came Tad wrote from Newport that his
mother was sick and the yachting trip was off till next
winter. Agnes cried when Margo showed her the letter.
“Well, there are other fish in the sea,” said Marge.
    She and Queenie, who had resigned from the roadtour
when she had a runin with the stagemanager, started mak-
ing the rounds of the castmgofiices again. They rehearsed
four weeks for a show that flopped the opening night.
Then they got jobs in the Greenwich Village Follies. The
director gave Margo a chance to do her Cuban number
and Margo got a special costume made and everything
only to be cut out before the dressrehearsal because the
show was too long.
    She would have felt terrible if Tad hadn’t turned up
after Thanksgiving to take her out every Saturday night.
He talked a lot about the yachting trip they were going to

                                                                                265

1181
take during his midwinter vacation. It all depended on
when his exams came.
   After Christmas she was at liberty again. Frank was

sick in bed with kidney trouble and Margo was crazy to

get away from the stuffy apartment and nursing Frank and
doing the housekeeping for Agnes who often didn^t get
home from her job till ten or eleven o^clock at night.
Frank lay in bed, his face looking drawn and yellow and
pettish, and needed attention all the time. Agnes never
complained, but Margo was so fed up with hanging around
New York she signed a contract for a job as entertainer in
a Miami cabaret, though Queenie and Agnes carried on
terrible and said it would rum her career.
    She hadnk yet settled her wrangle with the agent about
who was going to pay her transportation south when one
morning in February Agnes came in to wake her up.
    Margo could see that it was something because Agnes
was beaming all over her face. It was Tad calling her on
the phone. HeM had bronchitis and was going to take a
month off from college with a tutor on his father’s boat
in the West Indies. The boat was in Jacksonville. Before
the tutor got there he’d be able to take anybody he liked
for a little cruise. Wouldn’t Margo come and bring a
friend? Somebody not too gay. He wished Agnes could go,
he said, if that was impossible on account of Mr. Mande-
ville’s being sick who else could she take? Margo was so
excited she could hardly breathe. ^^Tad, how wonderful,”
she said.      was planning to go south this week anyway.
You must be a mindreader.”
    Queenie Riggs arranged to go with her though she
said she’d never been on a yacht before and was scared she
wouldn’t act right. ^^Well, I spent a lot of time in row-
boats when I was a kid. . . . It’s the same sort of thing,”
said Margo.
    When they got out of the taxicab at the Penn station
there was Tad and a skinny little sleekhaired boy with
         %66

1182
him waiting to meet them. They were all very much ex-
cited ?nd the boys^ breaths smelled pretty strong of gin.
^^You girls buy your own tickets/’ said Tad, taking Margo
by the arm and pushing some bills down into the pocket
of her furcoat. ^^The reservations are in your name, youdl
have a drawingroom and we’ll have one.”
          couple of wise guys,” whispered Queenie in her ear
as they stood in line at the ticketwmdow.
    The other boy’s name was Dick Rogers. Margo could
see right away that he thought Queenie was too old and
not refined enough. Margo was worried about their bag-
gage too. Their bags looked awful cheap beside the boys’
pigskin suitcases. She felt pretty down in the mouth when
the train pulled out of the station. Here I am pulling a
boner the first thing, she thought. And Queenie was
throwing her head back and showing her gold tooth and
yelling and shrieking already like she was at a fireman’s
picnic.
    The four of them settled down in the girls’ stateroom
with the little table between them to drink a snifter of gin
and began to feel more relaxed. When the train came out
of the tunnel and lights began flashing by m the blackness
outside, Queenie pulled down the shade. ^^My, this is real
cozy,” she said.
    ^^Now the first thing I got to worry about is how to get
you girls out on the boat. Dad won’t care if he thinks we
met you in Jacksonville, but if he knew we’d brought you
down from New York he’d raise Hail Columbia.” .
         think we’ve got a chaperon all lined up in Jackson-
  ^
ville,” said young Rogers. ^^She’s a wonder. She’s deaf
and blind and she can’t speak English.”
         wish we had Agnes along,” said Tad. "That’s Mar-
gots stepmother. My, she’s a good sport.”
   "Well, girls,” said young Rogers, taking a noisy swig
from the ginbottle. "When does the necking start?”
   After they’d had dinner in the diningcar, they went
                                                                                167

1183
lurching back to the drawingroom and had some more gin
and young Rogers wanted them to play strip poker but
Margo said no. “Aw, be a sporty” Queenie giggled.
Queenie was pretty tight already. Margo put on her fur-

coat. “I want Tad to turn in soon,” she said. ^^He^s just
out of a sickbed.”
    She grabbed Tad^s hand and pulled him out into the
passage. “Come on, let^s give the kids a break.  . . . The
trouble with you collegeboys is that the minute a girPc
unconventional you think she’s an easy mark.” “Oh,
Margo . , .” Tad hugged her through her furcoat as they
stepped out into the cold clanging air of the observation
platform. “You’re grand.”
    That night after they’d gotten undressed young Rogers
came in the girls’ room in his bathrobe and said there was
somebody asbng for Margo in the other stateroom. She
olept in the same stateroom with Tad, but she wouldn’t

let him get into the bunk with her. “Honest, Tad, I like
you fine,” she said, peeking from under the covers in the
upper berth, “but you know . .        . Heaven won’t protect
a workinggirl unless she protects herself.  . . . And in my
family we get married before the loving instead of after.”
    Tad sighed and rolled over with his face to the wall on
the berth below. “Oh, heck ... I’d been thinking about
that.” She switched off the light. “But, Tad, aren’t you
even going to kiss me goodnight
    In the middle of the night there was a knock on the
door. Young Rogers came in looking pretty rumpled.
“Time to switch,” he said. “I’m scared the conductor’ll
catch us.’^ “The conductor’ll mind his own damn business,”
said Tad grumpily, but Margo had already slipped out
and gone back to her own stateroom.
    Next morning at breakfast in the diningcar, Marge
wouldn’t stop kidding the other two about the dark circles
under their eyes. Young Rogers ordered a plate of oysters
and they thought they’d never get over the giggles. Ey
         268

1184
the time they got to Jacksonville Tad had taken Margo
back to the observation platform and asked her why the
hell they didn’t get married anyway, he was free white
and twentyone, wasn’t he? Margo began to cry and
grinned at him through her tears and said she guessed
there were plenty reasons why not.
    ^^By gum,” said Tad when they got off the train into the
sunshine of the station, ^Ve’ll buy us an engagement ring
anyway.”
    First thing on the way to a hotel in a taxi they went to
a jeweler’s and Tad bought her a solitaire diamond set in
platinum and paid for it with a check. ^^My, his old man
must be some millionaire,” whispered Queenie into
Margo’s ear in a voice like in church.
    After they’d been to the jeweler’s the boys drove the
girls to the Mayflower Hotel. They got a room there and
went upstairs to fix up a little. The girls washed their
underclothes and took hot baths and laid out their dresses
on the beds. “If you want my opinion,” Queenie was say-
ing while she was helping Margo wash her hair, “those
two livewires are gettin’ cold feet.      . . . All my life I’ve
wanted to go on a yachtin’ trip an’ now we’re not gettin’ to
go any more than a rabbit. .       . . Oh, Margo, I hope it
wasn’t me gummed the game.”
    “Tad’ll do anything I say,” said Margo crossly.
    “You wait and see,” said Queenie. “But here we are
squabblin’ when we ought to be enjoyin’ ourselves. . . .

Isn’t this the swellest room in the swellest hotel in Jack-
sonville, Florida?” Margo couldn’t help laughing. “Well,
whose fault is it?” “That’s right,” said Queenie, flouncing
out of the shampoosteaming bathroom where they were
washing their hair, and slamming the door on Margo.
“Have the last word.”
   At one o’clock the boys came by for them, and made
them get all packed up and check out of the hotel. They
w^ent down to the dock in a Lincoln car Tad had hired.

                                                                                269

1185
It was a beautiful sunny day. The Antoinette was anchored
out in the St. Johns River, so they had to go out in a little

speedboat.
   The sailor was a goodlooking young fellow all in white j
he touched his cap and held out his arm to help the girls

in. When Margo put her hand in his arm to step into the
boat she felt the hard muscles under the white duck sleeve
and noticed how the sun shone on the golden hairs on his
brown hand. Sitting on the darkblue soft cushion she
looked up at Tad handing the bags down to the sailor. Tad
looked pale from being sick and had that funny simple
broadfaced look, but he was a husky wellbuilt boy too.
Suddenly she wanted to hug him.
    Tad steered and the speedboat went through the water
so fast it took the girls’ breath away and they were scared
for fear the spray would spoil the new sportsdresses they
were wearing for the first time. ^^Oh, what a beauty,” they
both sighed when they saw the Antoinette so big and
white with a mahogany deckhouse and a broad yellow
chimney, ^^Oh, I didn’t know it was a steamyacht,” crooned
Queenie. ^Why, my lands, you could cross the ocean in it.”
^Tt’s a diesel,” said Tad. ^^Aren’t we alP” said Margo.
    Tad was going so fast they crashed right in the little
mahogany stairway they had for getting on the boat, and
for a second it cracked and creaked like it would break
right off, but the sailors managed to hold on somehow.
‘^Hold her, Newt,” cried young Rogers, giggling.
^^Damn,” said Tad and he looked very sore as they went
on board. The girls were glad to get up onto the beautiful
yacht and out of the tippy little speedboat where they
were afraid of getting their dresses splashed.
    The yacht had goodlooking officers in white uniforms
and a table was all ready for lunch out under an awning
on deck and a Filipino butler was standing beside it with
a tray of cocktails and all kinds of little sandwiches cut
into fancy shapes. They settled down to lunch in a hurry,
         270

1186
because the boys said they were starved. They had broiled
Florida lobster in a pink sauce and cold chicken and salad
and they drank champagne. Margo had never been so
happy in her life.
   While they were eating the yacht started to move slowly
down the river, away from the ramshackle wharves and
the dirtylooking old steamboats into the broad reaches of
brown river that was splotched with green floating patches
of waterhyacinths. A funny damp marshy smell came on
the wind off the tangled trees that hid the banks. Once
they saw a dozen big white birds with long necks fly up
that Tad said were egrets.        bet they’re expensive,” said
Queenie. ^^They’re protected by the federal government,”
said young Rogers.
    They drank little glasses of brandy with their coffee.
By the time they got up from the table they were all
pretty well spiffed. Margo had decided that Tad was the
swellest boy she’d ever known and that she wouldn’t hold
out on him any longer, no matter what happened.
    After lunch Tad showed them all over the boat. The
diningroom was wonderful, all mirrors paneled in white
and gold, and the cabins were the coziest things. The girls’
cabin was just like an oldfashioned drawingroom. Their
things had been all hung out for them while they’d been
eating lunch.
    While they were looking at the boat young Rogers and
Queenie disappeared somewhere, and the first thing
Margo knew she and Tad were alone in a cabin looking
at a photograph of a sailboat his father had won the Ber-
muda race with. Looking at the picture his cheek brushed
against hers and there they were kissing.
    “Gee, you’re great,” said Tad. “I’m kind of clumsy at
this ... no experience, you know.”
    She pressed against him. “I bet you’ve had plenty.”
With his free hand he was bolting the door. “Will you do
like the ring said. Tad?”

                                                                                271

1187
    When they went up on deck afterwards. Tad was acting
                         he wouldn^t look her in the eye and talked
kind of funny 5
all the time to young Rogers. Queenie looked flushed and

all rumpled up like she’d been through a wringer, and
staggered when she walked. Margo made her fix herself
up and do hc^ hair. She sure was wishing she hadn’t
brought Queenie. Margo looked fresh as a daisy herself,
she decided when she looked in the big mirror in the up-

stairs saloon.
    The boat had stopped. Tad’s face looked like a thunder-
cloud when he came back from talking to the captain.
^W/e’ve got to go back to Jacksonville, burned out a bear-
ing on the oilpump,” he said.         hell of a note.”
    ^^That’s great,” said young Rogers. ^We can look into
the local nightlife.”
    ^^And what I want to know is,” said Queenie, ^Vhere’s
that chaperon you boys were talkin’ abou,t'’”
    ^^By gum,” said Tad, ^Ve forgot Mrs. Vinton. ... I
bet she’s been waiting down at the dock all day.”
    ^^Too late for herbicide,” said Margo and they all
laughed except Tad who looked sourer than ever.
    It was dark when they got to Jacksonville. They’d had
to pack their bags up again and they’d changed into dif-
ferent dresses. While they were changing their clothes
Queenie had talked awful silly. ^^You mark my words,
Margo, that boy wants to marry you.” “Let’s not talk
about it,” Margo said several times. “You treat him like
he was dirt.” Margo heard her own voice whining and
mean: “And who’s business it is?” Queenie flushed and
went on with her packing. Margo could see she was sore.
    They ate supper grumpily at the hotel. After supper
young Rogers made them go out to a speakeasy he’d
found. Margo didn’t want to go and said she had a head-
ache, but everybody said now be a sport and she went. It
was a tough kind of a place with oilcloth on the tables and
sawdust on the floor. There were some foreigners, wops or
         272

1188
Cubans or something, standing against a bar in another
room. Queenie said she didn’t think it was the kind of
place Mother’s little girl ought to be seen in. “Who the
hell’s going to see us?” said Tad still in his grouch. “Don’t
we want to see life?” Rogers said, trying to cheer every-
body up.
    Margo lost track of what they were saying. She was
staring through the door into the barroom. One of the
foreigners standing at the bar was Tony. 11c looked older
and his face was kind of puffy, but there was no doubt that

it was Tony. He looked awful. He wore a rumpled white
suit frayed at the cuffs of the trousers and he wiggled his
hips like a woman as he talked. The first thing Margo
thought was how on earth she could ever have liked that
fagot. Out of the corner of her eye she could see Tad’s
sullen face and his nice light untidy hair and the cleancat
collegeboy way he wore his clothes. She had to work fast.
She v/as just opening her mouth to say honestly she had
to go back to the hotel, when she caught sight of Tony’s
big black eyes and dark lashes. He was coming towards the
table with his mincing walk, holding out both hands.
“Querida mia. . .      . Why are you here?”
    She introduced him as Antonio de Garrido, her partner
m a Cuban dance number on the Keith circuit, but he let
the cat out of the bag right away by calling her his dear
wife. She could feel the start Tad gave when he heard
that. Then suddenly Tad began to make a great fuss over
Tony and to order up drinks for him. He and Rogers kept
whispering and laughing together about something. Then
 Tad was asking Tony to come on the cruise with them.
    She could see Tad was acting drunker than he really
was. She was ready for it when the boys got up to go.
Tad’s face was red as a beet. “We got to see the skipper
about that engine trouble,” he said. “Maybe Senor de
Garrido will see you girls back to the hotel. .            . . Now
don’t do anything I wouldn’t do.”

                                                                                 273

1189
   “See you in the morning, cuties,” chimed in young
Rogers.
   After they’d gone Margo got to her feet. “Well, no use

waiting around this dump. ... You sure put your foot in

it, Tony.” Tony had tears in his eyes. “Everything is very
bad with me,” he said. “I thought maybe my little Margo
                              you know we used to lie very fond.
remembered . . .
Don Manfredo, you remember my patron, Margo, had

to leave Havana very suddenly. I hoped he would take
me to Pans, but he brought me to Miami with him. Now
we are no more friends. We have been unlucky at roulette.

      . He has only enougii money for himself.”
    -Why don’t you get a job?”
    “In these clothes ... I am ashamed to show my face

. . . maybe your friends , . .”
    “You lay off of them, do you hear?” Margo burst out.
Queenie was blubbeimg, “You should have bought us
return tickets to New York. Another time you remember
that. Never leave the homeplate without a return ticket.”
    Tony took them home to the hotel in a taxi and insisted
on paying for it. He made a big scene saying goodnight.
“Little Margo, if you never see me again, remember I
loved you. ... I shall keel myself.” As they went up in
the elevator they could see him still standing on the side-
walk where they had left him.
   In the morning they were waked up by a bellboy bring-
ing an envelope on a silver tray. It was a letter to Margo
from Tad. The handwriting was an awful scrawl. All it
said was that the trip was off because the tutor had come
ctnd they were going to have to pick up Dad in Palm Beach.
Enclosed there were five twenties. “Oh, goody goody,”
cried Queenie, sitting up in bed when she saw them. “It
sure would have been a long walk home. . . . Honest,
that boy’s a prince.” “A damn hide,” said Margo. “You
take fifty and I take fifty. . . . Lucky I have an engage-
ment fixed up in Miami.” It was a relief when Queenie
        274

1190
saia sjfie^d take the first train back to little old New York.
Margo didn’t want ever to see any of that bunch again.
    They hadn’t finished packing their bags when there was
Tony at the door. He sure looked sick. Margo was so
nervous she yelled at him, ^Who the hell let you in?”
    Tony let himself drop into a chair and threw back his
head with his eyes closed. Queenie closed up her traveling-
bag and came over and looked at him. ^‘Say, that bozo
looks halfstarved. Better let me order up some coffee or
something. ... Was he really your husband like he
said?”
    Margo nodded.
    ^Wellj you’ve got to do something about him. Poor
boy, he sure does look down on his uppers.”
         guess you’re right/’ said Margo, staring at them both
with hot dry eyes.
    She didn’t go down to Miami that day. Tony was sick
and threw up everything he ate. It turned out he hadn’t
had anything to eat for a week and had been drinking
hard. H bet you that boy dopes,” Queenie whispered in
Margo’s ear.
    They both cried when it was time for Queenie to go to
her train. ^T’ve got to thank you for a wonderful time
while it lasted,” she said. Margo put Tony to bed after
Queenie had gone off to her train. When they objected
down at the desk she said he was her husband. They had to
register again. It made her feel awful to have to write
down in the book Mr. and Mrs. Antonio de Garrido. Once
it was written it didn’t look so bad though.
    It was three days before Tony could get up. She had to
have a doctor for him. The doctor gave him bromides and
hot milk. The room was seven fifty a day and the meals
sent up and the doctor and medicine and everything ran
into money. It began to look like she’d have to hock the
ring Tad had given her.
    It made her feel like she was acting in a play living

                                                                                275

1191
with Tony again. She was kind of fond of him after all,

but it sure wasn’t what she’d planned. As he began to feel

better he began to talk confidently about the magnificent

act they could put on together. Maybe they could sell it

to the cabaret she’d signed an engagement with in Miami.
After all Tony was a sweettempered kind of a boy.
    The trouble was that whenever she went out to get her

hair curled or something, she’d always find one of the
bellhops, a greasylooking blackhaired boy who was some
kind of a spick himself, in the room with Tony. When
she asked Tony what about it he’d laugh and say, ^Tt is

nothing. We talk Spanish together. That is all. He has
been very attentive.” ^^Yes, very,” said Margo. She felt so
damn lousy about everything she didn’t give a danan any-
way.
    One morning when she woke up Tony was gone. The
roll of bills in her pocketbook was gone and all her jewelry
except the solitaire diamond she wore on her finger was
gone too. When she called up the desk to ask if he’d paid
the bill they said that he had left word for her to be called
at twelve and that was all. Nobody had seen him go out.
The spick bellhop had gone too.
    All that Margo had left was her furcoat and fifteen
cents. She didn’t ask for the bill, but she knew it must be
about fifty or sixty bucks. She dressed thoughtfully and
carefully and decided to go out to a lunchroom for a cup
of coffee. That was all the breakfast she had the price of.
    Outside it was a warm spring day. The sunshine glinted
on the rows of parked cars. The streets and the stores and
the newsstands had a fresh sunny airy look. Margo walked
 up and down the main stem of Jacksonville with an awful
 hollow feeling in the pit of her stomach. She looked in
 haberdashery store windows and in the windows of cheap
 jewelers and hockshops and read over carefully all the
 coming attractions listed at the movingpicture houses. She
 found herself in front of a busstation. She read the fares
         27$

1192
and the times buses left for Miami and New Orleans and
Tallahassee and Orlando and Tampa and Atlanta,
Georgia, and Houston, Texas, and Los Angeles, Cali-
fornia. In the busstation there was a lunch counter. She
went in to spend her fifteen cents. SheM get more for the
ring at a hockshop if she didn’t barge in on an empty
stomach, was what she was thinking as she sat down at the
counter and ordered a cup of coffee and a sandwich.




                                                     NEWSREEL LVIII


                 In my dreams it always seems
                     I hear you softly call to me
                          Valencia^
                 Where the orange trees forever scent the
                      Bre^%e beside the sea

         which m Itself typifies the great drama of the Miami we
have today. At the time only twenty years ago when the site
of the Bay of Biscayne Bank was a farmer’s hitchingyard and
that of the First National Bank a public barbecue ground thft
ground here where this ultramodern hotel and club stands
was isolated primeval forest. My father and myself were clear-
ing little vegetable patches round it and I was peddling vege-
tables at the hotel Royal Palm, then a magnificent hotel set in
a wild frontier. Even eight years ago I was growing tomatoes

                          Valencta ^

                           SEEK MISSING LOOT
                     WOMAN DIRECTS HIGHWAY ROBBERY

                      La%y River flowing to the southland
                          Down where I long to be

           RADIUM VICTIMS TIPPED BRUSHES IN MOUTHS

                                                                                         277

1193
        this peninsula has been white every month though there
have been some months when West Florida was represented
as only fair    ’

       GIRL EVANGELS AWAIT CHRIST IN
                                     NEW YORK
                          When the red red robin
                              Comes bob bob bobbin^ along along
        We Want You to Use Our Credit System to Your Ut-
most Advantage, Only a Small Down Payment and the Bal-
ance m Small Amounts to Suit Your Convenience,

                          Therein he no more sobbind
                              When he stents throhbird

               URGES STRIKES BE TERMED FELONIES

                              When he starts throhbin^
                                  His old sweet song
                              When the red red robin

        bright and early he showed no signs of fatigue or any of
the usual evidences of a long journey just finished. There was
not a wrinkle on his handsome suit of silken material, the
Weave and texture and color of which were so suitable for
tropic summer days. His tie with its jeweled stickpin and his
finger ring were details m perfect accord with his immaculate
attire. Though small m stature and unassuming in manner, he
disposed of $20,000,000 worth of building operations with as
little fuss or flurry as ordinarily accompanies the act of a pas-
senger on a trolley car in handing a nickel to the conductor.



   THE CAMPERS AT KITTY HAWK

         On December seventeenth, nineteen hundred and
three, Bishop Wright of the United Brethren onetime
editor of the                         r&t&sco'p0 received in his frame
         278

1194
house on Hawthorn Street in Dayton, Ohio, a telegram
from his boys Wilbur and Orville who’d gotten it into
their heads to spend their vacations in a little camp out
on the dunes of the North Carolina coast tinkering with
a homemade glider they’d knocked together them-
selves. The telegram read-

SUCCESS FOUR FLIGHTS THURSDAY MORNING ALL
AGAINST TWENTYONE MILE WIND STARTED FROM LEVEL
WITH ENGINEPOWER ALONE AVERAGE SPEED THROUGH
AIR THIRTYONE MILES LONGEST FIFTYSEVEN SECONDS
INFORM PRESS HOME CHRISTMAS

        The figures were a little wrong because the tele-
graph operator misread Orville’s hasty penciled scrawl
        but the fact remains
        that a couple of young bicycle mechanics from
Dayton, Ohio
        had designed constructed and flown
        for the first time ever a practical airplane.

        Afler running the motor a few minutes to heat it
uf I released the wire that held the machine to the
track and the machine started forward into the wind.
Wilbur ran at the side of the machine holding the wing
to balance it on the track. Unlike the start on the 14th
made in a calm the machine facing a 2j mile wind
started very slowly.     .  . , Wilbur was able to stay with

it until it lifted from the track after a forty-foot run.
One of the lifesaving men snapped the camera for us
taking a picture just as it reached the end of the track
and the machine had risen to a height of about two
feet.  . .    . The course of the flight up and down was
eo(^tremely erratic^ partly due to the irregularities of the
atr^ partly to lack of experience in handling this ma-
chine. A sudden dart when a little over a hundred and
twenty feet from the point at which it rose in the air
                                                                                m

1195
ended the flight.     . . . This flight lasted only 12 sec-
onds but it was nevertheless the flrst in the history of
the world in which a machine carrying a man had raised
itself by its own fower into the air in full flight, had
sailed forward without reduction of speed and had
finally landed at a point as high as that from which it
started.

        A little later in the day the machine was caught
in a gust of wind and turned over and smashed, almost
killing the coastguardsman who tried to hold it down;
        it was too bad
        but the Wright brothers were too happy to care
        they’d proved that the damn thing flew.

         When these points had been definitely established
we at once packed our goods and returned home know-
ing that the age of the flying machine had come at last.

        They were home for Christmas in Dayton, Ohio,
where they’d been born In the seventies of a family who
had been settled west of the Alleghenies since eighteen
fourteen, in Dayton, Ohio, where they’d been to
grammarschool and highschool and joined their father’s
church and played baseball and hockey and worked out
on the parallel bars and the flying swing and sold news-
papers and built themselves a printmgpress out of odds
and ends from the junkheap and flown kites and tink-
ered with mechanical contraptions and gone around
town as boys doing odd jobs to turn an honest penny.
        The folks claimed it was the bishop’s bringing
home a helicopter, a fiftycent mechanical toy made of
two fans worked by elastic bands that was supposed to
hover in the air, that had got his two youngest boys
hipped on the subject of flight
        so that they stayed home instead of marrying the
        2.8c

1196
way the other boys did, and puttered all day about the
house picking up a living with jobprinting,
        bicyclerepair work,
        sitting up late nights reading books on aero-
dynamics.
        Still they were sincere churchmembers, their bicy-
cle business was prosperous, a man could rely on their
word. They were popular in Dayton.
        In those days flyingmachines were the big laugh
of all the crackerbarrel philosophers. Langley’s and
Chanute’s unsuccessful experiments had been jeered
down with an I-told-you-so that rang from coast to
coast. The Wrights’ big problem was to find a place
secluded enough to carry on their experiments without
being the horselaugh of the countryside. Then they
had no money to spend 5
                                                               when they needed
        they were practical mechanics j
anything they built it themselves.


        They hit on Kitty Hawk,
         on the great dunes and sandy banks that stretch
south towards Hatteras seaward of Albemarle Sound,
         a vast stretch of seabeach
         empty except, for a coastguard station, a few fish-
£,’men’s shacks and the swarms of mosquitoes and the
ticks and chiggers in the crabgrass behind the dunes
         and overhead the gulls and swooping terns, in the
evening fishhawks and cranes flapping across the salt-
marshes, occasionally eagles
         that the Wright brothers followed soaring with
their eyes
         as Leonardo watched them centuries before
         straining his shai-p eyes to apprehend
         the laws of flight.

1197
        Pour miles across the loose sand from the scatter-
ing of shacks, the Wright brothers built themselves a
camp and a shed for their gliders. It was a long way to
pack their groceries, their tools, anything they hap-
                          in summer it was hot as blazes, the mos-
oened to need 5
quitoes were hell 5
        but they were alone there
        and they’d figured out that the loose sand was as

soft as anything they could find to fall in.
        There with a glider made of two plants and a

tail in which they lay flat on their bellies and controlled
the warp of the planes by shimmying their hips, taking

off again and again all day from a big dune named Kill
Devil Hill,
         they learned to fly.



         Once they’d managed to hover for a few seconds
         and soar ever so slightly on a rising aircurrent
         they decided the time had come
         to put a motor in their biplane.



         Back in the shop in Dayton, Ohio, they built an
airtunnel, which is their first great contribution to the
 science of flying, and tried out model planes in it.
         They couldn’t interest any builders of gasoline
 engines so they had to build their own motor.
         It worked; after that Christmas of nineteen three
 the Wright brothers weren’t doing it for fun any more;
 they gave up their bicycle business, got the use of a
 big old cowpasture belonging to the local banker for
 practice flights, spent all the time when they weren’t
 working on their machine in promotion, worrying about
 patents, infringements, spies, tryine to interest govern-
         282

1198
ment officials, to make sense out o£ the smooth involved
heartbreaking remarks of lawyers.
        In two years they had a plane that would cover
twentyfour miles at a stretch round and round the cow'-
pasture.
        People on the interurban car used to crane theii
necks out of the windows when they passed along the
edge of the field, startled by the clattering pop pop of
the old Wright motor and the sight of the white biplane
like a pair of ironingboards one on top of the other
chugging along a good fifty feet in the air. The cows
soon got used to it.



        As the flights got longer
        the Wright brothers got backers,
        engaged in lawsuits,
        lay in their beds at night sleepless with the whine
of phantom millions, worse than the mosquitoes at
Kitty Hawk.



         In nineteen seven they went to Paris,
         allowed themselves to be togged out in dress suits
and silk hats,
         learned to tip waiters
         talked with government experts, got used to gold
braid and postponements and Vandyke beards and th<
outspread palms of politicos. For amusement
         they played diabolo in the Tuileries gardens


         They gave publicized flights at Fort Myers, where
they had their first fatal crackup, St. Petersburg, Paris,
              at Pau they were all the rage,
Berlin 5
         such an attraction that the hotelkeeper
                                                                                 283

1199
        wouldn’t charge them for their room.
        Alfonso of Spain shook hands with them and was
photographed sitting in the machine,
        King Edward watched a flight,
        the Crown Prince insisted on being taken up,
        the rain of medals began.



        They were congratulated by the Czar
        and the King of Italy and the amateurs of sport,
and the society climbers and the papal titles,
        and decorated by a society for universal peace.



        Aeronautics became the sport of the day.
        The Wrights don’t seem to have been very much
impressed by the upholstery and the braid and the gold
medals and the parades of plush horses,
        they remained practical mechanics
        and insisted on doing all their own work them-
selves,
        even to filling the gasolinetank.



        In nineteen eleven they were back on the dunes
        at Kitty Hawk with a new glider.
        Orville stayed up in the air for nine and a half
minutes, which remained a long time the record for
motorless flight.
        The same year Wilbur died of typhoidfever in
Dayton.
        In the rush of new names: Farman, Bleriot, Cur-
tiss, Ferber, Esnault-Peltrie, Delagrangej
        in the snorting impact of bombs and the whine and
rattle of shrapnel and the sudden stutter of machine-
guns after the motor’s been shut off overhead,
        284

1200
        and we flatten into the mud
        and make ourselves small cowering in the corners

of ruined walls,
        the Wright brothers passed out of the headlines
        but not even headlines or the bitter smear of news-

print or the choke of smokescreen and gas or chatter

of brokers on the stockmarket or barking of phantom
millions or oratory of brasshats laying wreaths on new
monuments
        can blur the memory
        of the chilly December day
        two shivering bicycle mechanics from Dayton,
Ohio,

        first felt their homemade contraption
        whittled out of hickory sticks,
        gummed together with Arnstein’s bicycle cement,
        stretched with muslin they’d sewn on their sister’s
sewingmachine in their own backyard on Hawthorn
Street in Dayton, Ohio,
        soar into the air
         above the dunes and the wide beach

         at Kitty Hawk,



                                                    NEWSREEL LIX


        the stranger first coming to Detroit if he be interested in

the busy economic side of modern life will find a marvelous

                             if he be a lover of nature he will take notice
industrial beehive ;
of a site made forever remarkable by the waters of that noble

strait that gives the city its name, if he be a student of romance
and history he will discover legends and records as entertaining
 ind as instructive as the continent can supply
                                                                                 285

1201
                Pve a longing for my Omaha town
                     I long to go there and settle down

DETROIT LEADS THE WORLD IN THE
    MANUFACTURE OF AUTOMOBILES

                I want to see my fa
                    I want to see my ma
                         I want to go to dear old Omaha

                       DETROIT IS FIRST

    IN PHARMACEUTICALS
              STOVES RANGES FURNACES
                         ADDING MACHINES
                                    PAINTS AND VARNISHES
                                               MARINE MOTORS
                                                         OVERALLS
    SODA AND SALT PRODUCTS
              SPORT SHOES
                         TWIST DRILLS
                                    SHOWCASES
                                               CORSETS
                                                         GASOLINE TORCHED
                                                                    TRUCKS

        Mr. Radio Man wordt you do what you can
                         ause Pm so lonely
             Tell my Mammy to come back home
                     Mr. Radio Man

DETROIT THE DYNAMIC RANKS HIGH
    IN FOUNDRY AND MACHINE SHOP PRODUCTS
            IN BRASS AND BRASS PRODUCTS
                     IN TOBACCO AND CIGARS
                             IN ALUMINUM CASTINGS
                                      IN IRON AND STEEL
                                               IN LUBRICAIOR TOOLS
                                                       MALLEABLE IRON
                                                                  METAL BEDS

1202
               Back to the land that gave me birth
                   The grai^est flace on God^s green earth
                       Cakjorma^ That^s where 1 belong.

    '^DETROIT THE CITY WHERE LIFE IS
                            WORTH LIVING”



                                 CHARLEY ANDERSON


   First thing Charley lieard when he climbed down from
the controls was FarrelPs voice shouting, ^^Charley Ander^*
son, the boy with the knowhow. Welcome to little old
Detroit,” and then he saw FarrelPs round face coming
across the green grass of the field and his big mouth wide
open. ^^Kind of bumpy, wasn^t it^^”
    ^Tt was cold as hell,” said Charley. ^^Call this a field

    ^We^re getting the Chamber of Commerce het up about

it. You can give ^em an earful about it maybe.”
         sure did slew around in that mud. Gosh, I pulled ovti
in such a hurry I didn’t even bring a toothbrush.”
    Charley pulled off his gloves that were dripping with
oil from a leak he’d had trouble with in the bumpy going
over the hills. His back ached. It was a relief that Bill
Cermak was there to get the boat into the hangar.
right, let’s go,” he said. “Thataboy,” roared Farrell and
put his hand on Charley’s shoulder. ^We’ll stop by the
house and see if I can fit you into a change of clothes.’*
    At that moment a taxi rolled out onto the fi^pld and out
of it stepped Taki. He came running over with Charley’s
suitcase. He reached the car breathless. “I hope you have
a nice journey, sir.” ^^Check,” said Charley. ^^Did you get
me a walkup?” ^Yery nice inexpensive elevator apartment
opposed to the Museum of Municipal Art,” panted Taki in
im squeaky voice.

                                                                                287

1203
    “Well, that’s service,” Farrell said and put his foot on
the starter of his puttycolored Lincoln towncar. The motor
purred silkily.
   Taki put the suitcase in back and Charley hopped in
beside Farrell. “Taki thinks we lack culture,” said Charley,
laughing, Farrell winked.
    It was pleasant sitting slumped in the seat beside Far-
rell’s welldressed figure behind the big softpurring motor,
letting a little drowsiness come over him as they drove
down broad straight boulevards with here and there a con-
struction job that gave them a whiff of new bricks and raw
firboards and fresh cement as they passed. A smell of early
spring came off the fields and backlots on a raw wind that
had little streaks of swampy warmth in it.
    “Here’s our little shanty,” said Farrell and swerved into
a curving graded driveway and jammed on the brakes at
the end of a long greystone house with narrow pointed
windows and gothic pinnacles like a cathedral. They got
out and Charley followed him across a terrace down an
avenne of boxtrees in pots and through a frenchwindow
into a billiardroom with a heavilycarved ceiling. “This is
my playroom,” said Farrell. “After all a man’s got to have
someplace to play. . . . Here’s a bathroom you can
change in. I’ll be back for you in ten minutes.”
    It was a big bathroom all in jadegreen with a couch,
an easychair, a floorlamp, and a set of chestweights and
indianclubs in the corner. Charley stripped and took a hot
shower and changed his clothes. He was just putting on
his bestlooking striped tie when Farrell called through the
door. “Everything O.K.?” “Check,” said Charley as he
came out. “I feel like a million dollars.” Farrell looked
him in the eye in a funny way and laughed. “Why not?”
he said.
    The office was in an unfinished ofiicebuilding in a ring of
unfinished ofiicebuildings round Grand Circus Park. “You
won’t mind if I run you through the publicity department
         28S

1204
first, Charley,” said FarrelL “Eddy SawyeFs a great boy,
Then wedl all get together in my office and have som^
food.”
    “Check,” said Charley.
    “Say, Eddy, here’s your birdman,” shouted Farrell,
pushing Charley into a big bright office with orange hang-
ings. “Mr. Sawyer, meet Mr. Anderson . .        . the Charley
Anderson, our new consulting engineer. . .       . Give us a
buzz when you’ve put him through a course of sprouts.”
   Farrell hurried off leaving Charley alone with a small
yellowfaced man with a large towhead who had the talk
and manners of a highschool boy with the cigarette habit.
Eddy Sawyer gave Charley’s hand a tremendous squeeze,
asked him how he liked the new offices, explained that
orange stood for optimism, asked him if he ever got air-

sick, explained that he did terribly, w^asn’t it the damnedest
luck seeing the business he was in, brought out from under
his desk a bottle of whiskey. “I bet J. Y. didn’t give you a
drink. . . . That man lives on air, a regular salamander.”
    Charley said he would take a small shot and Eddy
Sawyer produced two glasses that already had the ice in
them and a siphon. “Say when.” Charley took a gulp, then
Eddy leaned back in his swivelchair having drained off his
drink and said, “Now, Mr. Anderson, if you don’t mind
let’s have the old lifehistory, or whatever part of it is fit
to print. . . . Mind you, we won’t use anything right
away but we like to have the dope so that we can sort of
feed it out as occasion demands.”
    Charley blushed. “Well,” he said, “there’s not very
much to tell.”
    “Thataboy,” said Eddy Sawyer, pouring out two more
drinks and putting away the whiskeybottle. “That’s how
all the best stories begin.” He pressed a buzzer and a
curlyhaired stenographer with a pretty pink dollface came
in and sat down with her noteboc^ at the other side of the
desk. While he was fumbling through his story, Charley

                                                                                289

1205
kept repeating to himself in the back of his head^ ^^Now,

bo, donk make an ass of yourself the first day.” Before
they were through Farrell stuck his head in the door and
said to come along, the crowd was waiting.
    ^Well, did you get all fixed up!^     .  .  . Charley, I want
you to meet our salesmanager ... Joe Stone, Charley
Anderson. And Mr, Frank and Mr. O’Brien, our battery
of legal talent, and Mr. Bledsoe, he’s in charge of output

« . . that’s your department.”
                                                                 there was a slick
    Charley shook a number of hands j
black head with hair parted in the middle, a pair of bald
heads and a steelgrey head with hair bristling up like a
shoebrush, noseglasses, tortoiseshell glasses, one small mus-
tache. ^^Sure mike,” Eddy Sawyer was stuttering away
nervously. ^^I’ve got enough on him to retire on the black-
mail any time now.”
    ^^That’s a very good starter, young man,” said Cyrus
Bledsoe, the greyhaired man, gruffly.        hope you’ve got
some more notions left in the back of your head.”
    ^^Check,” said Charley.
    They all, except Bledsoe who growled that he never ate
lunch, went out with him to the Athletic Club where they
Fad a private diningroom and cocktails set out. Going up
in the elevator a voice behind him said, “How’s the boy,
Charley?” and Charley turned round to find himself face
to face with Andy Merritt. Andy Merritt’s darkgrey suit
seemed to fit him even better than usual. His sour smile
was unusually thin.
    “Why, what are you doing here?’’ Charley blurted out.
    “Detroit,” said Andy Merritt, “is a town that has al-
ways interested me extremely.”
    “Say, how’s Joe making out?” Andy Merritt looked
pained and Charley felt he ought to have kept his mouth
shut. “Joe was m excellent health when I last saw him,”
said Andy. It turned out that Andy was lunching with
them too.

         290

1206
   When they were working on the filetmignon^ Farrell
got up and made a speech about how this luncheon was
a beginning of a new spirit in the business of manufac-
turing airplane parts and motors and that the time had
come for the airplane to quit hanging on the apronstrings
of the automotive business because airplanes were going ta
turn the automobile men into a lot of bicycle manufac-
turers before you could say Jack Robinson. A million-
dollar business had to be handled in a milliondollar way*
Then everybody yelled and clapped and Farrell held up
his hand and described Charley Anderson^s career as a wat
ace and an inventor and said it was a very happy day, a
day heM been waiting for a long time^ when he could wel-
come him into the Tern flock. Then Eddy Sawyer led a
cheer for Anderson and Charley had to get up and say
how he was glad to get out there and be back in the great
open spaces and the real manufacturing center of this
country, and when you said manufacturing center of this
country what you meant was manufacturing center of the
whole bloody world. Eddy Sawyer led another cheer and
then they all settled down to eat their peachmelba.
    When they were getting their hats from the checkroom
downstairs Andy Merritt tapped Charley on the shoulder
and said, ^^A very good speech. ... You know Td felt
for some time we ought to make a break. ... You can^t
run a bigtime business with smalltown ideas, That^s the
trouble with poor old Joe who’s a prince, by the way . .
smalltown ideas. . .
    Charley went around to see the apartment. Taki had
everything fixed up in great shape, flowers in the vases and
all that sort of thing. “Well, this is slick,” said Charley.
“How do you like it in Detroit?” “Very interesting,” said
Taki. “Mr. Ford permits to visit Highland Park.” “Gosh,
you don’t lose any time.   . . . Nothing like that assembly^
line in your country, is there?” Taki grinned and nodded^
“Very interesting,” he said with more emphasis.

                                                                                 29X

1207
    Charley took oif his coat and shoes and lay down on the
couch in the sittingroom to take a nap but it seemed he’d

just closed his eyes when Taki was grinning and bowing
from the door.
   ^^Very sorry, sir, Mr. Benton, longdistance.” ^^Check,”

said Charley.
   Taki had his slippers there for him to stick his feet into
and had discreetly laid his bathrobe on a chair beside the
couch. At the phone Charley noticed that it was already
dusk and that the streetlights were just coming on.
    ^^Hello, Nat,” ^^Hay, Charley, how are you making
out^” ^^Great,” said Charley. ^^Say, I just called up to let
you know you and Andy Merritt were going to be elected
vicepresidents at the next meeting of Tern stockholders.”
^^How do you know?^” Nat laughed into the phone. “Some
intelligence service,” said Charley. “Well, service is what
we’re here for,” said Nat. “And, Charley, there’s a little
pool down here.    . . . I’m taking a dip myself and I
thought you might like to come in. ... I can’t tell you
the details over the phone but I wrote you this afternoon.”
“I haven’t got any cash.” “You could put up about ten
grand of stock to cover. The stock won’t be tied up long,”
“Check,” said Charley. “Shoot the moon .      . . this is my
lucky year.”
    The plant was great. Charley drove out there in a new
Buick sedan he bought himself right off the dealer’s floor
the next morning. The dealer seemed to know all about
him and wouldn’t even take a downpayment. “It’ll be a
pleasure to have your account, Mr. Anderson,” he said.
    Old Bledsoe seemed to be on the lookout for him and
showed him around. Everything was lit with skylights.
There wasn’t a belt in the place. Every machine had its
 own motor. “Farrell thinks I’m an old stickinthemud be-
 cause I don’t talk high finance all the time, but God damn
 it, if there’s a more uptodate plant than this anywhere,
 I’ll eat a goddamned dynamo.” “Gee, I thought we were
         292

1208
in pretty good shape out at Long Island City.         .  .  . But
this beats the Dutch.” “That’s exactly what it’s intended
to do,” growled Bledsoe.
    Last Bledsoe introduced Charley to the engineering
force and then showed him into the office off the drafting-
room that was to be his. They closed the groundglass door
and sat down facing each other in the silvery light from
the skylight. Bledsoe pulled out a stogie and offered one
to Charley. “Ever smoke these?         .  .  . They clear the
head.”
    Charley said he’d try anything once. They lit the stogies
and Bledsoe began to talk between savage puffs of stinging
blue smoke. “Now look here, Anderson, I hope you’ve
come out here to work with us and not to juggle your
damned stock. ... I know you’re a war hero and all that
and are slated for windowdressing, but it looks to me like
you might have somepun in your head too.    .  .  . I’m say-
ing this once and I’ll never say it again. ... If you’re
workin’ with us, you’re workin’ with us and if you’re not
you’d better stick around your broker’s office where you
belong.”
    “But, Mr. Bledsoe, this Is the chance I’ve been lookin’
 for,” stammered Charley. “Hell, I’m a mechanic, that’s

 all. I know that.”
     “Well, I hope so.       .  . . If you are, and not a god-
 damned bondsalesman, you know that our motor’s lousy
 and the ships they put it in are lousy. We’re ten years be-
 hind the rest of the world in flyin’ and we’ve got to catch
 up. Once we get the designs we’ve got the production ap-
 paratus to flatten ’em all out. Now I want you to go home
 and get drunk or go wenchin’ or whatever you do when
 you’re worried and think about this damn business.” “I’m
 through with that stuff,” said Charley. “I had enough of
 that in New York.”
     Bledsoe got to his feet with a jerk, letting the ash from
 his stogie fall on his alpaca vest. “Well, you better get

                                                                                 293

1209
married then.” “I been thinkin’ of that.        . . . But I can’t

find the other name to put on the license,” said Charley,
laughing. Bledsoe smiled. “You design me a decent light
dependable sixteencylinder aircooled motor and I’ll get
my little girl to introduce you to all the bestlookin’ gals in

Detroit. She knows ’em all.   . .   . And if it’s money you’re

lookin’ for, they sweat money.” The phone buzzed. Bled-
soe answered it, muttered under his breath, and stamped
out of the office.
    At noon Farrell came by to take Charley out to lunch.
“Did old Bledsoe give you an earful.?” he asked. Charley
nodded. “Well, don’t let him get under your skin. His
bark is worse than his bite. He wouldn’t be in the outfit if
he wasn’t the best plantmanager in the country.”
    It was at the Country Club dance that Farrell and his
wife, who was a thin oldish blonde haggard and peevish
under a festoon of diamonds, took him out to, that Char-
ley met old Bledsoe’s daughter Anne. She was a square-
shouldered girl in pink with a large pleasantlysmiling
mouth and a firm handshake. Charley cottoned to her first
thing. They danced to Just a Girl That Men Forget and
she talked about how crazy she was about flying and had
five hours toward her pilot’s license. Charley said he’d take
her up any time if she wasn’t too proud to fly a Curtiss-
Robin. She said he’d better not make a promise if he didn’t
intend to keep it because she always did what she said she’d
do. Then she talked about golf and he didn’t let on that
he’d never had a golfclub m his hand in his life.
    At supper when he came back from getting a couple of
plates of chickensalad he found her sitting at a round table
under a Japanese lantern with a pale young guy, who
turned out to be her brother Harry, and a girl with beau-
tiful ashenblond hair and a touch of Alabama in her talk
whose name was Gladys Wheatley. She seemed to be en-
gaged or somethmg to Har^ Bledsoe who had a silver
flask and kept pouring gin into the fruitpunch and held
         294

1210
iier hand and called her Glad. They were all younger

than Charley, but they made quite a fuss over him and

kept saying what a godawful town Detroit was. When
Charley got a little gm inside of him he started telling

war yarns for the first time in his life.
    He drove Anne home and old Bledsoe came out with

a copy of the Engineering Journal in his hand and said,,

^^So youVe got acquainted, have you?’’ ^^Oh, yes, we’re

old friends, Dad,” she said. ^^Charley’s going to teach me

to fly.” “Humph,” said Bledsoe and closed the door in

Charley’s face with a growling: “You go home and worry
about that motor.”
    All that summer everybody thought that Charley and
Anne were engaged. He’d get away from the plant for an
hour or two on quiet afternoons and take a ship up at the

flyingfield to give her a chance to pile up flying hours and
on Sundays they’d play golf. Charley would get up early
Sunday mornings to take a lesson with the golf pro out at

the Sunnyside Club where he didn’t know anybody. Sat-
urday nights they’d often have dinner at the Bledsoes’
house and go out to the Country Club to dance. Gladys
Wheatley and Harry were usually along and they were
known as a foursome by all the younger crowd. Old Bled-
soe seemed pleased that Charley had taken up with his
youngsters and began to treat him as a member of the
                                                                                        after
 family. Charley was happy, he enjoyed his work 5
 the years in New York being in Detroit was like being
 home. He and Nat made some killings in the market. As
 vicepresident and consulting engineer of the Tern Com-
 pany he was making $25,000 a year.
     Old Bledsoe grumbled that it was too damn much
 money for a young engineer, but it pleased him that
 Charley spent most of it on a small experimental shop
 where he and Bill Cermak were building a new motor on
 their own. Bill Cermak had moved his family out from
 Long Island and was full of hunches for mechanical im^

                                                                                 295

1211
provements. Charley was so busy he didn^t have time to
think of women or take anything but an occasional drink in
a social way. He thought Anne was a peach and enjoyed
her company but he never thought of her as a girl he might
someday go to bed with.
    Over the Labor Day weekend the Farrells invited the
young Bledsoes and Gladys Wheatley out for a cruise.
When he was asked Charley felt that this was highlife at
last and suggested he bring Taki along to mix drinks and
act as steward. He drove the Bledsoes down to the yacht-
club in his Buick. Anne couldn’t make out why he was feel-
ing so good. ^^Nothing to do for three days but sit around
on a stuff}^ old boat and let the mosquitoes bite you,” she
was grumbling in a gruff tone like her father’s. ^^Dad’s
right when he says he doesn’t mind working over his work
but he’s darned if he’ll work over his play.”
    ^^But look at the company we’ll have to suffer in, An-
nie.” Charley put his arm round her shoulders for a mo-
ment as she sat beside him on the front seat. Harry who
was alone in the back let out a giggle. “Well, you needn’t
act so smart, mister,” said Anne, without turning back. “You
and Gladys certainly do enough public petting to make a
cat sick.” “The stern birdman’s weakening,” said Harry.
Charley blushed. “Check,” he said. They were already at
the yachtclub and two young fellows in sailorsuits were
taking the bags out of the back of the car.
   Farrell’s boat was a fast fiftyfoot cruiser with a dining-
room on deck and wicker chairs and a lot of freshvarnished
mahogany and polished brass. Farrell wore a yachtingcap
and walked up and down the narrow deck with a worried
look as the boat nosed out into the little muggy breeze.
The river in the late afternoon had a smell of docks and
weedy swamps. “It makes me feel good to get out on the
water, don’t it you, Charley?      .  .  . The one place they
can’t get at you.”
    Meanwhile Mrs. FarreJl was apologizing to the ladies
        296

1212
for the cramped accommodations.         keep trying to get
Yardly to get a boat with some room in it but it seems to
me every one he gets is more cramped up than the last
one.”
    Charley had been listening to a light clinking sound
from the pantry. When Taki appeared with a tray of man-
hattan cocktails everybody cheered up. As he watched Taki
bobbing with the tray in front of Gladys, Charley thought
how wonderful she looked all in white with her pale abun-
dant hair tied up in a white silk handkerchief.
   Smiling beside him was Anne with her brown hair blow-
ing in her eyes from the wind of the boat’s speed. The
engine m-ade so much noise and the twinscrews churned up
so much water that he could talk to her without the others’
hearing. “Annie,” he said suddenly, “I been thinking it’s
about time I got married.”
    “Why, Charley, a mere boy like you.”
    Charley felt warm all over. All at once he wanted a
woman terribly bad. It was hard to control his voice.
    “Well, I suppose we’re both old enough to know better,
but what would you think of the proposition? I’ve been
pretty lucky this year as*far as dough goes.”
    Anne sipped her cocktail looking at him and laughing
with her hair blowing across her face. “What do you want
me to do, ask for a statement of your bankdeposit?”
    “But I mean you,”
    “Check,” she said.
    Farrell was yelling at them, “How about a little game
of penny ante before supper?   . .   , It’s gettin’ windy out
here. We’d be better off m the saloon.”
    “Aye, aye, cap,” said Anne.
    Before supper they played penny ante and drank man-
hattans and after supper the Farrells and the Bledsoes set-
tled down to a game of auction. Gladys said she had a
headache and Charley, after watching the game for a

                                                                                297

1213
while, went out on deck to get the reek of the cigar heM
been smoking out o£ his lungs.
    The boat was anchored in a little bay, near a lighted
wharf that jutted out from shore. A halfmoon was setting
behind a rocky point where one tall pine reached out of a
dark snarl of branches above a crowd of shivering white-

birches. At the end of the wharf there was some sort of
clubhouse that spilt ripples of light from its big windows 5
dancemusic throbbed and faded from it over the water.
Charley sat in the bow. The boys who ran the boat for
Farrell had turned in. He could hear their low voices and
catch a smell of cigarettesmoke from the tiny hatch for-
ward of the pilothouse. He leaned over to watch the small
grey waves slapping against the bow. ^^Bo, this is the big-
time stuff,” he was telling himself.
    When he turned around there was Gladys beside him.
     thought you’d gone to bed, young lady,” he said.
    ^^Thought you’d gotten rid of me for one night?” She
wasn’t smiling.
    ^^Don’t you think it’s a pretty night, Glad?”

                                     it was trembling and icecold. “You
    He took her hand 5
don’t want to catch cold, Glad,” he said. She dug her long
nails into his hand. “Are you going to marry Anne?”
    “Maybe.   . .   . Why? You’re goin’ to marry Harry,
aren’t you?”
    “Nothing in this world would make me marry him.”
    Charley put his arms round her. “You poor little girl,
you’re cold. You ought to be in bed.” She put her head on
his chest and began to sob. He could feel the tears warm
through his shirt. He didn’t know what to say. He stood
there hugging her with the smell of her hair giddy, like
the smell of Doris’s hair used to be, in his nostrils.
    “I wish we were off this damn boat,” he whispered. Her
face was turned up to his, very round and white. When he
kissed her lips she kissed him too. He pressed her to him
 hard. Now it was her little breasts he could feel aeainst
         ^98

1214
his chest. For just a second she let him put his tongue be-
tween her lips, then she pushed him away.
    ^^Charley, we oughtn’t to be acting like this, but I sud-
denly felt so lonely.”
    Charley’s voice was gruff in his -throat. ^^I’ll never let
you feel like that again. . . . Never, honestly . . 

never.  . . .” “Oh, you darling Charley.” She kissed him
again very quickly and deliberately and ran away from him
down the deck.
    He walked up and down alone. He didn’t know what
to do. He was crazy for Gladys now. He couldn’t go back
and talk to the others. He couldn’t go to bed. He slipped
down the forward hatch and through the galley, where
Taki sat cool as a cucumber in his white coat reading some
thick book, into the cabin where his berth was and changed
into his bathingsuit and ran up and dove over the side.
The water wasn’t as cold as he’d expected. He swam
around for a while in the moonlight. Pulling himself up
the ladder aft he felt cold and goosefleshy. Farrell with
a cigar in his teeth leaned over, grabbed his hand and
hauled him on deck.
    “Ha, ha, the iron man,” he shouted. “The girls beat us
two rubbers and went to bed with their winnings. Suppose
you get into your bathrobe and have a drink and a half
an hour of red dog or something silly before we turn m.”
“Check,” said Charley, who was jumping up and down on
the deck to shake off the water.
    While Charley was rubbing himself down with a towel
below, he could hear the girls chattering and giggling in
their stateroom. He was so embarrassed when he sat down
next to Harry who was a little drunk and silly so that he
drank off a half a tumbler of rye and lost eighty dollars.
He v/as glad to see that it was Harry who won. “Lucky
at cards, unlucky in love,” he kept saying to himself after
he’d turned in.
    A week later Gladys took Charley to see her parents
                                                                                m

1215
after they’d had tea together at his flat chaperoned by
laki’s gnn and his bobbing black head. Horton B. Wheat-
ley was a power, so Farrell said, in the Security Trust
Company, a redfaced man with grizzled hair and a small
silvery mustache. Mrs. Wheatley was a droopy woman
with a pretty Alabama voice and a face faded and pouchy
and withered as a spent toyballoon. Mr. Wheatley started
talking before Gladys had finished the introductions*
‘Well, sir, we’d been expectin’ somethin’ like that to hap-
pen. Of course it’s too soon for us all to make up our
minds, but I don’t see how I kin help tellin’ you, ma boy,
that I’d rather see ma daughter wedded to a boy like you
that’s worked his way up in the world, even though we
don’t know much about you yet, than to a boy like Harry
who’s a nice enough kid m his way, but who’s never done a
thing in his life but take the schoolin’ his father provided
for him. Ma boy, we are mighty proud, my wife and me,
to know you and to have you and our little girl .      .  , she’s
all we’ve got in this world so she’s mighty precious to
us . . .”
    “Your parents are .     .  . have been called away, I be-
lieve, Mr. Anderson,” put in Mrs. Wheatley. Charley
nodded. “Oh, I’m so sorry.        .  .  . They were from St.
Paul, Gladys says. .  .
    Mr. Wheatley was talking again. “Mr. Anderson,
Mother, was one of our most prominent war aces, he won
his spurs fightin’ for the flag, Mother, an’ his whole career
seems to me to be an example . . . now I’m goin’ to make
you blush, ma boy ... of how American democracy
works at its very best pushin’ forward to success the most
intelligent and bestfitted and weedin’ out the weaklin’s.

.  .  . Mr. Anderson, there’s one thing I’m goin’ to ask
you to do right now. I’m goin’ to ask you to come to
church with us next Sunday an’ address ma Sundayschool
class. I’m sure you won’t mind sayin’ a few words of in-
spiration and guidance to the youngsters there.”
        300

1216
    Charley blushed and nodded. “Aw, Daddy,” sang
Gladys, putting her arms around both their necks, “don’t
make him do that. Sunday’s the only day the poor boy gets
any golf. ... You know I always said I never would
marry a Sundayschool teacher.”
    Mr. Wheatley laughed and Mrs. Wheatley cast down
her eyes and sighed. “Once won’t hurt him, will it, Char-
ley?” “Of course not,” Charley found himself saying. “It
would be an inspiration.”
    Next day Charley and Mr. Wheatley had lunch alone
at the University Club. “Well, son, I guess the die is cast,”
said Mr. Wheatley when they met in the lobby. “The
Wheatley women have made up their minds, there’s
nothin’ for us to do but bow to the decision. I certainly
wish you children every happiness, son. . . .” As they ate
Mr. Wheatley talked about the bank and the Tern inter-
ests and the merger with Askew-Merritt that would a
Jittle more than double the capitalization of the new Tern
Aviation Company. “You’re surprised that I know all
about this, Charley .     . . that’s what I’d been thinkin’,
that boy’s a mechanical genius but he don’t keep track of
the financial end ... he don’t realize what his holdin’s
in that concern mean to him and the financial world.”
    “Well, I know some pretty good guys who give me the
lowdown,” said Charley.
    “Fair enough, fair enough,” said Mr. Wheatley, “but
now that it’s in the family maybe some of ma advice, the
result of twenty years of bankin’ experience at home in
Birmingham and here in this great new dazzlin’ city of
Detroit . . .”

    “Well, I sure will be glad to take it, Mr. Wheatley,”
stammered Charley.
    Mr. Wheatley went on to talk about a lot on the water-
front with riparian rights at Grosse Pointe he was plan-
ning to turn over to the children for a weddingpresu^
and how they ought to build on it right away if only as an

                                                                                301

1217
investment in the most restricted residential area in the

entire United States of America, “And, son, if you come
around to ma office after lunch you’ll see the plans for the

prettiest little old English house to set on that lot you
ever did see. I’ve been havin’ ’em drawn up as a surprise

for Mother and Gladys, by Ordway and Ordway. . . .
Halftimbered Tudor they call it. I thought I’d turn the
whole thing over to you children, as it’ll be too big for
Mother and me now that Gladys is gettin’ married. I’ll

chip in the lot and you chip in the house and we’ll settle

the whole thing on Gladys for any children.”
    They finished their lunch. As they got up Mr. Wheat-
ley took Charley’s hand and shook it. “And I sincerely
hope and pray that there’ll be children, son.”
    Just after Thanksgiving the society pages of all the De-
troit papers were full of a dinnerdance given by Mr. and
Mrs. Horton B. Wheatley to announce the approaching
marriage of their daughter Gladys to Mr. Charles Ander-
son inventor war ace and head of the research depa. .ment
at the great Tern Airplane Plant.
    Old Bledsoe never spoke to Charley after the day the
engagement was announced but Anne came over to Char--
ley and Gladys the night of the Halloween dance at the
Country Club and said she thoroughly understood and
wished them every happiness.
   A few days before the wedding Taki gave notice. “But
I thought you would stay on. . . . I’m sure my wife
would like it too. Maybe we can give you a raise.” Taki
griimed and bowed. “It is regrettable,” he said, “that I
experience only bachelor estaUishments . . . but I wish
you hereafter every contentment.”
   What hurt Charley most was that when he wrote Joe
Askew asking him to be his bestman, he wired back only
one word: “No.”
    The wedding was at the Emmanuel Baptist Church.
Charley wore a cutaway and new black shoes that pinched
        30a

1218
his toes. He kept trying to remember not to put his hand
up to his tie. Nat Benton came on from New York to be
bestman and was a great help. While they were waiting in
the vestry Nat pulled a flask out of his pants pocket and
tried to get Charley to take a drink. ^^You look kinda
green around the gills, Charley.” Charley shook his head
and made a gesture with his thumb in the direction from
which the organ music was coming. “Are you sure you got
the ring?” Nat grinned and took a drink himself. He
cleared his throat. “Well, Charley, you ought to con-
gratulate me for picking a winner. ... If I could spot
the market like I can spot a likely youngster Pd be in the
money right now.”
    Charley was so nervous he stammered. “Did .              .  .

don’t worry, Nat, I’ll take care of you.” They both laughed
and felt better. An usher was already beckoning wildly at
them from the vestry door.
    Gladys in so many satinwhite frills and the lace veil and
the orangeblossoms, with' a little boy in white satin hold-
ing up her train, looked like somebody Charley had never
seen before. They both said “I will” rather loud without
looking at each other. At the reception afterwards there
was no liquor in the punch on account of the Wheatleys.
Charley felt halfchoked with the smell of the flowers and
of women’s furs and with trying to say something to all
the overdressed old ladies he was introduced to, who all
said the same thing about what a beautiful wedding. He’d
just broken away to go upstairs to change his clothes when
he saw Ollie Taylor, very tight, trip on a Persian rug in
the hall and measure his length at the feet of Mrs. Wheat-
ley who’d just come out of the receptionroom looking very
pale and weepy in lavender and orchids. Charley kept
right on upstairs.
    In spite of the wedding’s being dry, Nat and Farrell
had certainly had something, because their eyes were shin-
ing and there was a moist look round their mouths when

                                                                                 303

1219
they came into the room where Charley was changing into

a brown suit for traveling. ^^Lucky bastards,” he said.
^Where did you get it? . . . Gosh, you might have kept
OUie Taylor out.”
   ^^He’s gone,” said Nat. They added in chorus, ^We at-
tend to everything.”
   ^^Gosh,” said Charley, “1 was just thinkin^ it’s a good
thing I sent my brother in Minneapolis and his gang in-

vitations too late for ’em to get here. I can just see my
old Uncle Vogel runnin’ around pinchin’ the dowagers in
the seat and cryin’ hochheit.”

    ^Tt’s too bad about Olhe,” said Nat. ^^He’s one of the
besthearted fellers in the world.”
    “Poor old Ollie,” echoed Charley. “He’s lost his grip.”
    There was a knock on the door. It was Gladys, her little

face pale and goldenhaired and wonderfullooking in the
middle of an enormous chinchilla collar. “Charley, we’ve
got to go. You naughty boy, I don’t believe you’ve looked

at the presents yet.”
    She led them into an upstairs sittingroom stacked with
glassware and silver table articles and flowers and smoking-
sets and toiletsets and cocktailshakers until it looked like a
departmentstore. “Aren’t they sweet?” she said. “Never
saw anythin’ like it in my life,” said Charley. They saw
some guests coming m at the other end and ran out into
the back hall again. “How many detectives have they
got?” asked Charley. “Four,” said Gladys.
    “Well, now,” said Charley. “We vamoose.”
    “Well, It’s time for us to retire,” chorused Farrell and
Nat suddenly doubled up laughing. “Or may we kiss the
bride?”
    “Check,” said Charley. “Thank all the ushers for me.”
    Gladys fluttered her hand. “You are dears ... go
away now,”
    Charley tried to hug her to him but she pushed him
         304

1220
r^'vay. “Daddy’s got all the bags out the kitchen door.   . .   .
Ohj let’s hurry.    .  .  . Oh, I’m almost crazy.”
   They ran down the back stairs and got into a taxi with
their baggage. His was pigskin, hers was shiny black. The
bags had a new expensive smell. Charley saw Farrell and
Nat come out from under the columns of the big colonial
porch but before they could throw the confetti the taxi-
driver had stepped on the gas and they were off.
    At the depot there was nobody but the Wheatleys, Mrs.
Wheatley crying in her baggy mink coat, Mr. Wheacley
orating about the American home whether anybody lis-
tened or not. By the time the train pulled out Gladys was
crying too and Charley was sitting opposite her feeling
miserable and not knowing how the hell to begin.
    “I wish we’d flown.”
    “You know it wouldn’t have been possible in this
weather,” said Gladys and then burst out crying again.
    To have something to do Charley ordered some dinner
from the diningcar and sent the colored porter to get a
pail of ice for the champagne.
    “Oh, my nerves,” moaned Gladys, pressing her gloved
hands over her eyes.
    “After all, kid, it isn’t as if it was somebody else. . . 

It’s just you and me,” said Charley gently.
    She began to titter. “Well, I guess I’m a little silly.”
    When the porter grinning and respectfully sympathetic
opened the champagne she just wet her lips with it. Char-
ley drank off his glass and filled it up again. “Here’s how,
Glad, this is the life.” When the porter had gone Charley
asked her why she wouldn’t drink. “You used to be quite
a rummy out at the countryclub. Glad.”
    “I don’t want you to drink either.”
    'Why?”
    She turned very red. “Mother says that if the parents
get drunk they have idiot children.”
    “Oh, you poor baby,” said Charley, his ey^ s filling with

                                                                                305

1221
tears. They sat for a long time looking at each other while

the fizz went out of the champagne in the glasses and the
champagne slopped out onto the table with the jolting of
the tram. When the broiled chicken came Gladys couldn^t

eat a bite of it. Charley ate both portions and drank up the
champagne and felt he was acting like a hog.
   The tram clanked and roared in their ears through the
snowy night. After the porter had taken away the supper-
dishes Charley took off his coat and sat beside her and
tried to make love to her. She^d only let him kiss her and
hug her like they^d done before they were married. When
he tried to undo her dress she pushed him away. ^Wait^
wait.”
    She went into the lavatory to get into her nightdress.
He thought he’d go crazy she took so long. He sat in his
pyjamas in the icy gritty flaw of wind that came in through
the crack of the window until his teeth were chattering. At
last he started to bang on the door of the toilet. “Anything
wrong. Glad? What’s the matter, darlin’?”
    She came out in a fluffy lace negligee. She’d put on too
much makeup. Her lips were trembling under the greasy
lipstick. “Oh, Charley, don’t let’s tonight on the tram, it’s
so awful like this.”
    Charley felt suddenly uncontrollably angry. “But you’re
my wife. I’m your husband, God damn it.” He switched off
the light. Her hands were icy in his. As he grabbed her to
him he felt the muscles of his arms swelling strong behind
her slender back. It felt good the way the lace and silk tore
under his hands.
    Afterwards she made him get out of bed and lie on the
couch wrapped in a blanket. She bled a great deal. Neither
of them slept. Next day she looked so pale and the bleed-
ing hadn’t stopped and they were afraid they’d have to
stop somewhere to get a doctor. By evening she felt better,
but still she couldn’t eat anything. All afternoon she lay
halfasleep on the couch while Charley sat beside her hold-
         306

1222
ing her hand with a pile of unread magazines on his knees.
    It was like getting out of jail when they got off the train
at Palm Beach and saw the green grass and the palmtrees
and the hedges of hibiscus in flower. When she saw the
big rooms of their corner suite at the Royal Poinciana,
where sheM wanted to go because that was where her
father and mother had gone on their weddmgtrip, and the
flowers friends had sent that filled up the parlor. Gladys
threw her arms round his neck and kissed him even before
the last bellboy had got out of the room. ^^Oh, Charley,
forgive me for being so horrid.” Next morning they lay
happy in bed side by side after they’d had their breakfast
and looked out of the window at the sea beyond the palm-
trees, and smelt the freshness of the surf and listened to

it pounding along the beach, ^^Oh, Charley,” Gladys said,
^det’s have everything always just like this.”
    Their first child was born in December. It was a boy,
They named him Wheatley. When Gladys came back
from the hospital instead of coming back to the apartment
she went into the new house out at Grosse Pomte that still
smelt of paint and raw plaster. What with the hospital ex-
penses and the furniture bills and Christmas, Charley had
to borrow twenty thousand from the bank. He spent more
time than ever talking over the phone to Nat Benton’s
office in New York. Gladys bought a lot of new clothes
and kept tiffanyglass bowls full of freezias and narcissus
all over the house. Even on the dressingtable in her bath-
room she always had flowers. Mrs. Wheatley said she got
her love of flowers from her grandmother Randolph^; be-
cause the Wheatleys had never been able to tell one flower
from another. When the next child turned out to be a girl,
Gladys said, as she lay in the hospital, her face looking
drawn and yellow against the white pillows, beside the
great bunch of glittering white orchids Charley had or-
dered from the florist at five dollars a bloom, she wished

                                                                                307

1223
she could name her Orchid. They ended by naming her
Marguerite after Gladyses grandmother Randolph.
    Gladys didn^t recover very well after the little girPs

birth and had to have several small operations that kept
her in bed three months. When she got on her feet she had
the big room next to the nursery and the childreiPs nurse’s
room redecorated in white and gold for her own bedroom.
Charley groused about it a good deal because it was in the
other wing of the house from his room. When he’d come
over in his bathrobe before turning in and try to get into
bed with her, she would keep him off with a cool smile,
and when he insisted, she would give him a few pecking
kisses and tell him not to make a noise or he would wake
the babies. Sometimes tears of irritation would start into
his eyes. Jesus, Glad, don’t you love me at all?” She
would answer that if he really loved her he’d have come
home the night she had the Smyth Perkinses to dinner in-
stead of phoning at the last minute that he’d have to stay
at the oifSce.

    ^^But, Jesus, Glad, if I didn’t make the money how
would I pay the bills?”
    “If you loved me you’d be more considerate, that’s all,”
she would say and two curving lines would come on her
face from her nostrils to the corners of her mouth like the
lines on her mother’s face and Charley would kiss her
gently and say poor little girl and go back to his room
feeling like a louse. Times she did let him stay she lay so
cold and still and talked about how he hurt her, so that
he would go back to the tester bed in his big bedroom
feeling so r.ervous and jumpy it would take several stiff
whiskies to get him in shape to go to sleep.
    One night when he’d taken Bill Cermak, who was now
a foreman at the Flint plant, over to a roadhouse the other
side of Windsor to talk to him about the trouble they were
having with molders and diemakers, after they’d had a
couple of whiskies, Charley found himself instead asking
         308

1224
Bill about married life. ^^Say, Bill, do you ever have trou-
ble with your wife?”
    ^^Sure, boss,” said Bill, laughing. “I got plenty trouble.
But the old lady’s all right, you know her, nice kids good
cook, all time want me to go to church.”
    “Say, Bill, when did you get the idea of callin’ me
boss*^ Cut it out.”
    “Too goddam rich,” said Bill.
    “S—t, have another whiskey.” Charley drank his down.
“And beer chasers like in the old days.       .  . . Remember
that Christmas party out in Long Island City and that
blonde at the beerparlor. .   .  . Jesus, I used to think I was
a little devil with the women. . . . But my wife she don’t
seem to get the idea.”
                                                            what the hell, maybe
    “You have two nice kids already 3
you’re too ambitious.”
    “You wouldn’t believe It .         .  . only once since little
Peaches was born.”
    “Most women gets hotter when they’re married a while.

.  .  . That’s why the boys are sore at your damned effi-
ciency expert.”
    “Stauch’’ Stauch’s a genius at production.”
    “Maybe, but he don’t give the boys any chance for re-
production.” Bill laughed and wiped the beer off his
mouth.
    “Good old Bill,” said Charley. “By God, I’ll get you on
the board of directors yet.”
    Bill wasn’t laughing any more, “Honestly, no kiddin’.
That damn squarehead make the boys work so hard they
can’t get a hard on when they go to bed, an’ their wives
raise hell with ’em. I’m strawboss and they all think son-
ofabitch too, but they’re right.”
    Charley was laughing. “You’re a squarehead yourself,
Bill, and I don’t know what I can do about it, I’m just an
employee of the company myself, . . . We got to have

                                                                                309

1225
efficient production or they^ll wipe us out of business.
Ford^s buildin^ planes now.”
   ^^You’ll lose all your best guys.    .  .  . Slavednvin’ may
be all right in the automobile business, but buildin’ an air-
plane motor’s skilled labor.”
   “Aw, Christ, I wish I was still tinkerin’ with that damn
motor and didn’t have to worry about money all the time.

.  .  . Bill, I’m broke.      .  .  . Let’s have another whiskey.”
    “Better eat.”
    “Sure, order up a steak .  . . anythin’ you like. Let’s go
take a piss. That’s one thing they don’t charge for.       .  . .

Say, Bill, does it seem to you that I’m gettin’ a potbelly?

.  ,  . Broke, a potbelly, an’ my wife won’t sleep with me.

.  .  . Do you think I’m a rummy, Bill? I sometimes think
I better lay off for keeps. I never used to pull a blank when
I drank.”
    “Hell, no, you smart young feller, one of the smartest,
a fool for a threepomt landing and a pokerplayer .    .  . my
God.”
    “What’s the use if your wife won’t sleep with you?”
    Charley wouldn’t eat anything. Bill ate up both their
steaks. Charley kept on drinking whiskey out of a bottle
he had under the table and beer for chasers. “But tell me

.  .  . your wife, does she let you have it any time you want
It?  .  .  . The guys in the shop, their wives won’t let ’em
alone, eh?”
    Bill was a little drunk too. “My wife she do what I
say.”
    It ended by Bill’s having to drive Charley’s new Pack-
ard back to the ferry. In Detroit Bill made Charley drink
a lot of sodawater in a drugstore, but when he got back in
the car he just slumped down at the wheel. He let Bill
drive him home to Grosse Pointe. Charley could hear Bill
arguing with the guards along the road, each one really
had to see Mr. Anderson passed out in the back of the car
before he’d let Bill through, but he didn’t give a hoot,
         310

1226
struck him so funny he began to giggle. The big joke was
when the houseman had to help Bill get him up to his bed-
room. ^^The boss a little sick, see, overwork,” Bill said
each time, then he’d tap his head solemnly. ^^Too much
brainwork.” Charley came to up in his bedroom and was
able to articulate muzzily: ^^Bill, you’re a prince. -            . .
George, call a taxi to take Mr. Cermak home      . .   . lucky
bastard go home to his wife.” Then he stretched out on
the bed with one shoe on and one shoe off and went
quietly to sleep.
    When he came back from his next trip to New York
and Washington, he called up Bill at the plant. ^^Hay,
Bill, how’s the boy? Your wife still do what you say, ha,
ha. Me, I’m terrible, very exhaustin’ business trip, under-
stand . .   . never drank so much in my life or with so
many goddam crooks. Say, Bill, don’t worry if you get
fired, you’re on my private payroll, understand.             . .   .
We’re goin’ to fire the whole outfit.         . . . Hell, if they
don’t like it workin’ for us let ’em try to like it workin’
for somebody else. . .   . This is a free country. I wouldn’t
want to keep a man against his will.   .  .  . Look, how long
will it take you to tune up that little Moth type, you know,
number i6      . . . yours truly’s Mosquito            . .   . Check.

.  .  . Well, if we can get her in shape soon enough so they
can use her as a model, see, for their specifications.     .  . .

Jesus, Bill, if we can do that .         . , we’re on easystreet.
... You won’t have to worry about if the kids can go to
college or not .    . . goddam it, you an’ the missis can go
to college yourselves. , . . Check.”
    Charley put the receiver back on the desk. His secretary
Miss Finnegan was standing in the door. She had red hair
and a beautiful complexion with a few freckles round her
little sharp nose. She was a snappy dresser. She was look-
ing at Charley with her lightbrown eyes all moist and wide
as he was laying down the law over the phone. Charley
felt his chest puff out a little. He pulled in his belly as

                                                                                3^1

1227
hard as he could. “Gosh,” he was saying at the back o£ his
head, “maybe I could lay Elsie Finnegan.” Somebody had
put a pot of blue hyacinths on his deskj a smell of spring
came from them that all at once made him remember
Bar-le-Duc, and troutfishing up the Red River.

    It was a flowerysmellmg spring morning again when
Charley drove out to the plant from the office to give the
Anderson Mosquito its trial spin. He had managed to give
Elsie Finnegan a kiss for the first time and had left her
crumpled and trembling at her desk. Bill Cermak had said
over the phone that the tiny ship was tuned up and in fine
shape. It was a relief to get out of the office where heM
been fidgeting for a couple of hours trying to get through
a call to Nat Benton^s office about some stock he’d wired
them to take a profit on. After he’d kissed her he’d told
Elsie Finnegan to switch the call out to the trial field for
him. It made him feel good to be driving out through the
halfbuilt town, through the avenue jammed with trucks
full of construction materials, jockeying his car among the
trucks with a feeling of shine and strength at the perfect
action of his clutch and the smooth response of the gears.
The gatekeeper had the New York call for him. The con-
nection was perfect. Nat had banked thirteen grand for
him. As he hung up the receiver he thought poor little
Elsie, he’d have to buy her something real nice. “It’s a
great day, Joe, ain’t it^^” he said to the gatekeeper.
    Bill was waiting for him beside the new ship at the en-
trance to the hangar, wiping grease off his thick fingers
with a bunch of waste. Charley slapped him on the back.
“Good old Bill. . .      . Isn’t this a great day for the race?”
Bill fell for it. “What race, boss?” “The human race, you
fathead.  .  . . Say, Bill,” he went on as he took off his
gloves and his welltailored spring overcoat, “I don’t mind
tellin’ you I feel wonderful today .            .  . made thirteen
grand on the market yesterday . . . easy as rollin’ off a
log.”

         312

1228
   While Charley pulled a suit of overalls on the me-
chanics pushed the new ship out onto the grass for Bill to
make his general inspection. ^^Jesus, she^s pretty.” The
tiny aluminum ship glistened in the sun out on the green
grass like something in a jeweler’s window. There were
dandelions and clover on the grass and a swirling flight of

little white butterflies went up right from under his black
clodhoppers when Bill came back to Charley and stood
beside him. Charley winked at Bill Cermak standing be-
side him in his blue denims stolidly looking at his feet.
^^Smile, you sonofabitch,” he said. ^^Don’t this weather
make you feel good?”
   Bill turned a square bohunk face towards Charley.
^^Now look here, Mr. Anderson, you always treat me good

.  .  . from way back Long Island days. You know me, do
work, go home, keep my face shut.”              hat’s on your
mind. Bill?   .  .  . Want me to try to wangle another raise
for you? Check,”
    Bill shook his heavy square face and rubbed his nose
with a black forefinger. ^^Tern Company used to be good
place to work good work good pay. You know me, Mr.
Anderson, I’m no bolshayvik        .  .  . but no stoolpigeon
either.”
    ^^But damn it. Bill, why can’t you tell those guys to have
a little patience .      .  . we’re workin’ out a profitsharin’
scheme. I’ve worked on a lathe myself. . . . I’ve worked
as a mechanic all over this goddam country. ... I know
what the boys are up against, but I know what the manage-
ment’s up against too.    .  . . Gosh, this thing’s in its in-
fancy, we’re pouring more capital into the business all the
time.  . .   . We’ve got a responsibility towards our inves-
tors. Where do you think that jack I made yesterday’s
goin’ but the business of course. The oldtime shop was a
great thing, everybody kidded and smoked and told smutty
stories, but the pressure’s too great now. If every depart-
ment don’t click like a machine we’re rooked. If the boys

                                                                                313

1229
want a union we’ll give ’em a union. You get up a meeting
and tell ’em how we feel about it but tell ’em we’ve got to
have some patriotism. Tell ’em the industry’s the first line
of national defense. We’ll send Eddy Sawyer down to talk

to ’em . .    . make ’em understand our problems.”
    Bill Cermak shook his head. ^Tlenty other guys do
that.” Charley frowned. “Well, let’s see how she goes/’
he snapped impatiently.
    ^^Gosh, she’s a honey.”
    The roar of the motor kept them from saying any more.
The mechanic stepped from the controls and Charley
climbed in. Bill Cermak got in behind. She started taxiing

fast across the green field. Charley turned her into the
wind and let her have the gas. At the first soaring bounce
there was a jerk. As he pitched forward Charley switched
off the ignition.
    They were carrying him across the field on a stretcher.
Each step of the men carrying the stretcher made two
jagged things grind together in his leg. He tried to tell
’em that he had a piece of something in his side, but his
voice was very small and hoarse. In the shadow of the
hangar he was trying to raise himself on his elbow. ^What
the devil happened^ Is Bill all right?” The men shook
their heads. Then he passed out again like the juice failing
in a car.
    In the ambulance he tried to ask the man in the white
jacket about Bill Cermak and to remember back exactly
what had happened, but the leg kept him too busy trying
not to yell. “Hay, doc,” he managed to croak, “can’t you
get these aluminum splinters out of my side? The damn
ship must have turned turtle on them. Wing couldn’t take
it maybe, but it’s time they got the motor lifted off me.
Hay, doc, why can’t they get a move on?”
   When he got the first whiff of the hospital, there were
a lot of men in white jackets moving and whispering round
him. The hospital smelt strong of ether. The trouble was
        3U

1230
he couldn’t breathe. Somebody must have spilt that
damned ether. No, not on my face. The motor roared. He
must have been seeing things. The motor’s roar swung into
an easy singsong. Sure, she was taking it fine, steady as
one of those big old bombers. When he woke up nurse
was helping him puke into a bowl.
   When he woke up again, for chrissake no more ether^
no, it was flowers, and Gladys was standing beside the ben
with a big bunch of sweetpeas in her hand. Her face had a
pinched look. ^^Hello, Glad, how’s the girP” “Oh, I’ve
been so worried, Charley. How do you feeP Oh, Charley,
for a man of your standing to risk his life in practice
flights .   . . Why don’t you let the people whose business

it is do it, I declare.” There was something Charley wanted
to ask. He was scared about something. “Say, are the kids
all right?” “Wheatley skinned his knee and I’m afraid the
baby has a little temperature. I’ve phoned Dr. Thompson.
I don’t think it’s anything though.”
    “Is Bill Cermak all right?”
    Gladys’s mouth trembled. “Oh, yes,” she said, cutting
the words off sharply. “Well, I suppose this means our
dinnerdance is off,  . . . The Edsel Fords were coming.”
“Hell, no, why not have it anyway? Yours truly can attend
in a wheelchair. Say, they sure have got me in a strait-
jacket. ... I guess I busted some ribs.” Gladys nodded^
her mourh was getting very small and thin. Then she sud-
denly began to cry.
    The nurse came in and said reproachfully, “Oh, Mrs.
Anderson.” Charley was just as glad when Gladys went
out and left him alone with the nurse. “Say, nurse, get
hold of the doctor, will you? Tell him I’m feeling fine
and want to look over the extent of the damage.” “Mr.
Anderson, you mustn’t have anything on your mind.” “I
know, tell Mrs. Anderson I want her to get in touch with
the office.” “But it’s Sunday, Mr. Anderson. A great many
people have been downstairs but I don’t think the doctor

                                                                                315

1231
is letting them up yet.” The nurse was a freshfaced girl
with a slightly Scotch way of talking.               bet you’re a
Canadian,” said Charley. ^^Right that time,” said the nurse.
     knew a wonderful nurse who was a Canadian once. If
Pd had any sense Pd have married her.”
   The housephysician was a roundfaced man with a jovial
smooth manner almost like a headwaiter at a big hotel.

^^Say, doc, ought my leg to hurt so damn much^” “You
see we haven’t set it yet. You tried to puncture a dung but
didn’t quite get away with it. We had to remove a few
                                                                             .”
little splinters of rib.” “Not from the lung . . “Luck-

ily not.” “But why the hell didn’t you set the leg at the
same time?” “Well, we’re waiting for Dr. Roberts to come
on from New York.    .  . . Mrs. Anderson insisted on him.
Of course we are all very pleased, as he’s one of the most
eminent men in his profession. . . . It’ll be another little
operation.”
    It wasn’t until he’d come to from the second operation
that they told him that Bill Cermak had died of a frac-
tured skull.
    Charley was in the hospital three months with his leg
in a Balkan frame. The fractured ribs healed up fast, but
he kept on having trouble with his breathing. Gladys han-
dled all the house bills and came every afternoon for a
minute. She was always in a hurry and always terribly
worried. He had to turn over a power of attorney to Moe
Frank his lawyer who used to come to see him a couple of
times a week to talk things over. Charley couldn’t say
much, he couldn’t say much to anybody he was in so much
pain.
    He liked it best when Gladys sent Wheatley to see him.
Wheatley was three years old now and thought it was
great in the hospital. He liked to see the nurse working
\ll the little weights and pulleys of the frame the leg hung
in. “Daddy’s living in a airplane,” was what he always
         316

1232
said about it. He had tow hair and his nose was beginning
to stick up and Charley thought he took after him.
    Marguente was still too little to be much fun. The one
time Gladys had the governess bring her, she bawled so
at the look of the scarylookmg frame she had to be taken
home. Gladys wouldn^t let her come again. Gladys and
Charley had a bitter row about letting Wheatley come as
she said she didn’t want the child to remember his father
in the hospital. ^^But, Glad, he’ll have plenty of time to get
over it, get over it a damn sight sooner than I will.”
Gladys pursed her lips together and said nothing. When
she’d gone Charley lay there hating her and wondering
how they could ever have had children together.
   Just about the time he began to see clearly that they all
expected him to be a cripple the rest of his life he began
to mend, but it was winter before he was able to go home
on crutches. He still suffered sometimes from a sort of
nervous difficulty in breathing. The house seemed strange
as he dragged himself around in it. Gladys had had every
room redecorated while he was away and all the servants
were different. Charley didn’t feel it was his house at all.
What he enjoyed best was the massage he had three times
a week. He spent his days playing with the kids and talk-
ing to Miss Jarvis, their stiff and elderly English gov-
erness. After they’d gone to bed he’d sit in his sittingroom
drinking scotch and soda and feeling puffy and nervous.
God damn it, he was getting too fat. Gladys was always
                                                  even when he went into fits
cool as a cucumber these days j
of temper and cursed at her, she’d stand there looking at
him with a cold look of disgust on her carefully madeup
face. She entertained a great deal but made the servants
understand that Mr. Anderson wasn’t well enough to come
down. He began to feel like a poor relation in his own
house. Once when the Farrells were coming he put on his
tuxedo and hobbled down to dinner on his crutches. There

                                                                                317

1233
was no place set for him and everybody looked at him like
he was a ghost.
    ^^Thataboy,” shouted Farrell in his yapping voice.
was expecting to come up and chin with you after dinner.”

It turned out that what Farrell wanted to talk about was
the suit for five hundred thousand some damn shyster had
Induced Cermak’s widow to bring against the company.
Farrell had an idea that if Charley went and saw her he
could induce her to be reasonable and settle for a small
annuity. Charley said he^d be damned if he^d go. At din-
ner Charley got tight and upset the afterdinner coffeecups
with his crutch and went off to bed in a rage.
    What he enjoyed outside of playing with the kids was
buying and selling stocks and talking to Nat over the long-
distance. Nat kept telling him he was getting the feel of
the market. Nat warned him and Charley knew damn well
that he was slipping at Tern and that if he didn’t do some-
thing he’d be frozen out, but he felt too rotten to go to
                                 what he did do was to sell out about
directors’ meetings j
half his stocks in small parcels. Nat kept telling him if he’d
only get a move on he could get control of the whole busi-
ness before Andy Merritt pulled off his new reorganiza-
tion, but he felt too damn nervous and miserable to make
the effort. All he could seem to do was to grumble and
call Julius Stauch and raise hell about details. Stauch had
taken over his work on the new monoplane and turned out
a little ship that had gone through all tests with flying
colors. When he’d put down the receiver, Charley would
pour himself a little scotch and settle back on the couch in
his window and mutter to himself, ^Well, you’re dished
this time.”
    One evening Farrell came around and had a long talk
and said what Charley needed was a fishing trip, he’d
never get well if he kept on this way. He said he’d been
talking to Doc Thompson and that he recommended three

         318

1234
months off and plenty of exercise if he ever expected to
throw away his crutches.
    Gladys couldn^t go because old Mrs. Wheatley was sick,
so Charley got into the back of his Lincoln towncar alone
with the chauffeur to drive him, and a lot of blankets to
keep him warm, and a flask of whiskey and a thermosbottle
of hot coffee, to go down all alone to Miami.
   At Cincinnati he felt so bum he spent a whole day in
bed in the hotel there. He got the chauffeur to get him
booklets about Florida from a travel agency, and finally
sent a wire to Nat Benton asking him to spend a week with
him down at the Key Largo fishingcamp. Next morning
he started off again early. He’d had a good night’s sleep
and he felt better and began to enjoy the trip. But he felt
a damn fool sitting there being driven like an old woman
all bundled up in rugs. He was lonely too because the
chauffeur wasn’t the kind of bird you could talk to. He
was a sourlooking Canuck Gladys had hired because she
thought it was classy to give her orders in French through
the speakingtubej Charley was sure the bastard gypped
him on the price of gas and oil and repairs along the roadj
that damn Lincoln was turning out a bottomless pit for
gas and oil.
    In Jacksonville the sun was shining. Charley gave him-
self the satisfaction of firing the chauffeur as soon as they’d
driven up to the door of the hotel. Then he went to bed
with a pint of bum corn the bellboy sold him and slept like
a log.
    In the morning he woke up late feeling thirsty but
cheerful. After breakfast he checked out of the hotel and
drove around the town a little. It made him feel good to
pack his own bag and get into the front seat and drive his
own car.
    The town had a cheerful rattletrap look in the sunlight
under the big white clouds and the blue sky. At the luncL
room next to the busstation he stopped to have a drink

                                                                               319

1235
He felt so good that he got out of the car without his
crutches and hobbled across the warm pavement. The wind
was fluttering the leaves of the magazines and the pink
and palegreen sheets of the papers outside the lunchroom
window. Charley was out of breath from the effort when
he slid onto a stool at the counter. "^^Give me a limeade
and no sweetnin’ in it, please,” he said to the ratfaced boy
at the fountain.
   The sodajerker didn’t pay any attention, he was looking
down the other way. Charley felt his face get red. His

first idea was, Pll get him fired. Then he looked where
the boy was looking. There was a blonde eating a sandwich
at the other end of the counter. She certainly was pretty.
She wore a little black hat and a neat bluegrey suit and a
litde white lace around her neck and at her wrists. She had
an amazed look on her face like she’d just heard some-
thing extraordinarily funny. Forgetting to favor his game
leg Charley slipped up several seats towards her. ^^Say, bo,
how about that limeade?’" he shouted cheerfully at the
sodajerker.
   The girl was looking at Charley. Her eyes really were
a perfectly pure blue. She was speaking to him. ^^Maybe
you know how long the bus takes to Miami, mister. This
boy thinks he’s a wit so I can’t get any data.”
    ^^Suppose we try it out and see,” said Charley.
    “They surely come funny in Florida.           . . . Another
humorist.”
    “No, I mean it. If you let me drive you down you’ll be
doing a sick man a great favor.”
    “Sure It won’t mean a fate worse than death?”
    “You’ll be perfectly safe with me, young lady. I’m al-
most a cripple. I’ll show you my crutches in the car.”
    “What’s the trouble?”
    “Cracked up in a plane.”
    “You a pilot?”
    Charley nodded. “Not quite skinny enough for Lind-
         320

1236
faergh/’ she said, looking him up and down. Charley
turned red. am a little overweight. It^s being cooped
up with this lousy leg.”
    ^Well, I guess 1^1 try it. If I step into your car and
wake up in Buenos Aires it^ll be my bad luck.”
   Charley tried to pay for her coffee and sandwich but she
wouldn’t let him. Something about her manner kept him
laughing all the time. When he got up and she saw how
he limped she pursed her mouth up. ^^Gee, that’s too bad.”
When she saw the car she stopped in her tracks. ^^Zowie,”
she said, ^Ve’re bloomin’ millionaires.”
   They were laughing as they got into the car. There was
something about the way she said things that made him
laugh. She wouldn’t say what her name was. ^^Call me
Mme. X,” she said. “Then you’ll have to call me Mr. A,”
said Charley.
   They laughed and giggled all the way to Daytona Beach
where they stopped off and went into the surf for a dip.
Charley felt ashamed of his pot and his pale skin and his
limp as he walked across the beach with her looking browm
and trim in her blue bathingsuit. She had a pretty figure
although her hips were a little big. “Anyway it’s not as if
I’d come out of it with one leg shorter than the other. The
doc says I’ll be absolutely O.K. if I exercise it right.”
    “Sure, you’ll be great m no time. And me thinkin’ you
was an elderly sugardaddy in the drugstore there.”
    “I think you’re a humdinger, Mme. X.”
    “Be sure you don’t put anything in writing, Mr. A.’’
    Charley’s leg ached like blazes when he came out of the
water^ but it didn’t keep him from having a whale of a
good appetite for the first time in months. After a big fish-
dinner they started off again. She went to sleep in the car
with her neat little head on his shoulder. He felt very
happy driving down the straight smooth concrete highway
although he felt tired already. When they got into Miami
that night she made him take her to a ,small hotel back

                                                                                321

1237
near the railroad tracks and wouldn^t let him come in with

her. “But gosh, couldn^t we see each other again?”
    “Sure, you can see me any night at the Palms. Pm an
entertainer there.”
    “Honest ... I knew you were an entertainer but I
didn^t know you were a professional.”
    “You sure did me a good turn, Mr. A. Now it can be
told ... I was flat broke with exactly the price of that
ham sandwich and if you hadn^t brought me down Pda
lost the chance of working here.    . . . Pll tell you about

it sometime.”
    “Tell me your name. I’d like to call you up.”
    ^Tfou tell me yours.”
    “Charles Anderson. I’ll be staying bored to death at the
Miami-Biltmore.”
    “So you really are Mr. A.     . .   . Well, goodby, Mr. A,
and thanks a million times.” She ran into the hotel. Char-
ley was crazy about her already. He was so tired he just
barely made his hotel. He went up to his room and tum-
bled into bed and for the first time in months went to sleep
without getting drunk first.
    A week later when Nat Benton turned up he was sur-
prised to find Charley in such good shape. “Nothin’ like a
change,” said Charley, laughing. They drove on down to-
wards the Keys together. Charley had Margo Dowling’s
photograph in his pocket, a professional photograph of her
dressed in Spanish costume for her act. He’d been to the
Palms every night, but he hadn’t managed to get her to
go out with him yet. When he’d suggest anything she’d
shake her head and make a face and say, “I’ll tell you all
about it sometime.” But the last night she had given him a
number where he could call her up.
    Nat kept trying to talk about the market and the big
reorganization of Tern and Askew-Merritt that Merritt
was engineering but Charley would shut him up with^
“Aw, hell, let’s talk about somethin’ else.” The camp was
         322

1238
all right but the mosquitoes were fierce. They spent a good
day on the reef fishing for barracuda and grouper. They
took a jug of bacardi out in the motorboat and fished and
drank and ate sandwiches. Charley told Nat all about the
crackup. ^^Honestly, I don^t think it was my fault. It was
one of those damn things you caiVt help. ... Now I feel
as if Pd lost the last friend I had on earth. Honest, Pd a
given anythin^ I had in the world if that hadn^t happened
to Bill.” ^^After all,” said Nat, ^^he was only a mechanic.”
    One day when they got m from fishing, drunk and with
their hands and pants fishy, and their faces burned by the
sun and glare, and dizzy from the sound and smell of the
motor and the choppy motion of the boat, they found wait-
ing for them a wire from Benton’s office.
    UNKNOWN UNLOADING TERN STOP DROPS FOUR AND A
HALF POINTS STOP WIRE INSTRUCTIONS
    ^Tnstiuctions hell,” said Benton, jamming his stuff into
his suitcase. ^We’ll go up and see. Suppose we charter a
plane at Miami.” ^^You take the plane,” said Charley
coolly. ^T’m going to ride on the tram.”
    In New York he sat all day in the back room of Nat
Benton’s office smoking too many cigars, watching the
ticker, fretting and fuming, riding up and down town in

taxicabs, getting the lowdown from various sallowfaced
friends of Nat’s and Moe Frank’s. By the end of the week
he’d lost four hundred thousand dollais and had let go
every airplane stock he had in the world.
   All the time he was sitting there putting on a big show
of business he was counting the minutes, the way he had
when he was a kid in school, for the market to close so that
he could go uptown to a speakeasy on Fiftysecond Street

CO meet a hennahaired girl named Sally Hogan he’d met
when he was out with Nat at the Club Dover. She was the

first girl he’d picked up when he got to New York. He
didn’t give a damn about her but he had to have some land

                                                                                323

1239
©f a girl. They were registered at the hotel as Mr. and
Mrs. Smith.
    One morning when they were having breakfast in bed
there was a light knock on the door. ^^Come in,” yelled
Charley, thinking it was the waiter. Two shabbylooking
men rushed into the room, followed by O’Higgins, a shy-
ster lawyer he’d met a couple of times back in Detroit.
Sally let out a shriek and covered her head with the pillow.
    “Howdy, Charley,” said O’Higgins. “I’m sorry to do
this but it’s all in the line of duty. You don’t deny that you
are Charles Anderson, do you? Well, I thought you’d
rather hear it from me than just read the legal terms.
Mrs. Anderson is suing you for divorce in Michigan.     .  . .
That’s all right, boys.”
    The shabby men bowed meekly and backed out the door.
    “Of all the lousy stinkin’ tricks .       .
    “Mrs. Anderson’s had the detectives on your trail ever
since you fired her chauffeur in Jacksonville.”
    Charley had such a splitting headache and felt so weak
from a hangover that he couldn’t lift his head. He wanted
to get up and sock that sonofabitch O’Higgins but all he
could do was lie there and take it. “But she never said
anything about it in her letters. She’s been writin’ me right
along. There’s never been any trouble between us.”
    O’Higgins shook his curly red head. “Too bad,” he
said. “Maybe if you can see her you can arrange it between
you. You know my advice about these things is always
keep ’em out of court. Well, I’m heartily sorry, old boy,
to have caused you and your charming friend any embar-
rassment ... no hard feelings I hope, Charley old man.
... I thought it would be pleasanter more open and
aboveboard if I came along if you saw a friendly face, as
you might say. I’m sure this can all be amicably settled.”
He stood there a while rubbing his hands and nodding and
then tiptoed to the door. Standing there with one hand on
the doorknob he waved the other big flipper towards the

1240
bed.                so long, Sally. .       .   . Guess Pll be seeiiP you
down at the office.^^ Then he closed the door softly after
him. Sally had jumped out of bed and was running to-
wards the door with a terrified look on her face. Charley
began to laugh in spite of his splitting headache. “Aw,
never mind, girlie,’’ he said. “Serves me right for bein’ a
sucker. ... I know we all got our livin’s to make.                       . . .
Come on back to bed.”



                                                            NEWSREEL LX


         Was Celine to blame? To young Scotty marriage seemed
just a lark, a wild time in good standing. But when she began
to demand money and the extravagant things he couldn’t af-
ford did Celine meet him halfway? Or did she blind herself
to the very meaning of the sacred word: wife?

   CKOOK FROZEN OUT OF SHARE IN BONDS TELLS MURDER
                                                PLOT

    TO REPEAL DECISION ON CAST IRON PIPE

                             In a little Sfantsh town
                                 ^Tvjas on a night like this

         speculative sentiment was encouraged at the opening of
the week by the clearer outlook. Favorable weather was doing
much to eliminate the signs of hesitation lately evinced by sev-
eral trades
                               Pm in love again
                                    dnd the Sfrmg
                                        Is corrard
                               Pm in love again
                                   Hear my heart strings
                                        Strummtn^

                           rrCHING GONE IN ONE NIGHT

1241
        thousands of prosperous happy women began to earn dou-

ble and treble their former wages and sometimes even more
immediately
                              Yes sir that^s my baby
                                  That^s my baby na-ow!

      APE TRIAL GOAT TO CONFER WITH
                                     ATTORNEYS

                           Mysterious Mr. Y to Testify

        an exquisite replica in miniature of a sunlit French coun-
try home on the banks of the Rhone boldly built on the crest
of Sunset Ridge overlooking the most beautiful lakeland m New
Jersey where every window frames a picture of surprising
beauty
                     And the tune Pm hummin^
                          Vll not go roarmrd like a kid again
                              Pll stay home and be a kid again

  NEIGHBORS ENJOIN NOCTURNAL SHOUTS IN
                                  TURKISH BATH
           ALL CITY POLICE TURN OUT IN
                                 BANDIT HUNT
                 CONGOLEUM BREAK FEATURES OPENING

         for the sixth week freight car loadings have passed the
million mark in this country, indicating that prosperity is gen-
eral and that records are being established and broken every-
where

                       Good'-bye east and good-bye west
                            Good-bye north and all the rest
                                Hello Swan-ee Hello

1242
                                           MARGO DOWLING


   When Margo got back to the city after her spring in
Miami everybody cried out how handsome she looked with
her tan and her blue eyes and her hair bleached out light
by the Florida sun. But she sure found her work cut out
for her. The Mandevilles were in a bad way. Frank had
spent three months in the hospital and had had one kidne)
removed m an operation. When he got home he was still
so sick that Agnes gave up her position to stay home and
nurse himj she and Frank had taken up Science and
wouldn’t have the doctor any more. They talked all the
time about having proper thoughts and about how Frank’s
life had been saved by Miss Jenkins, a practitioner Agnes
had met at her tearoom. They owed five hundred dollars
m doctor’s bills and hospital expenses, and talked about
God all the time. It was lucky that Mr. Anderson the new
boyfriend was a very rich man.
    Mr. A, as she called him, kept offering to set Margo up
in an apartment on Park Avenue, but she always said noth-
ing doing, what did he think she was, a kept woman? She
did let him play the stockmarket a little for her, and buy
her clothes and jewelry and take her to Atlantic City and
Long Beach weekends. He’d been an airplane pilot and
decorated in the war and had big investments in airplane
                                                                                   he was
companies. He drank more than was good for him 5
a beefy florid guy who looked older than he was, a big
talker, and hard to handle when he’d been drinking, but
he was openhanded and liked laughing and jokes when he
was feeling good. Margo thought he was a pretty good
egg. ‘^Anyway, what can you do when a guy picks up a
telephone and turns over a thousand dollars for you?” was
what she’d tell Agnes when she wanted to tease her.
^^Margie dear, you mustn’t talk like that,” Agnes would
say. ‘Tt sounds so mercenary.” Agnes talked an awful lol-

                                                                                327

1243
abouc Love and rlgnt thoughts and being true and good

these days. Margo liked better to hear Mr. Anderson
blowing about his killings on the stockmarket and the
planes heM designed^ and how he was going to organize
a net of airways that would make the Pennsylvania Rail-
road look like a suburban busline.
   Evening after evening she’d have to sit with him in
speakeasies in the Fifties drinking whiskey and listening to
him talk about this business and that and big deals in stocks
down on the Street^ and about how he was out to get that
Detroit crowd that was trying to ease him out of Standard
Airparts and about his divorce and how much it was cost-
ing him. One night at the Stork Club^ when he was show-
ing her pictures of his kids, he broke down and started to
blubber. The court had just awarded the custody of the
children to his wife.
    Mr. A had his troubles all right. One of the worst was
a redheaded girl he’d been caught with in a hotel by his
wife’s detectives who was all the time blackmailing him,
and threatening to sue for breach of promise and give the
whole story to the Hearst papers. ^^Oh, how awful/’ Agnes
would keep saying, when Margo would tell her about it
over a cup of coffee at noon. ^Tf he only had the right
thoughts. ... You must talk to him and make him try
and see. ... If he only understood I know everything
would be different. ... A successful man like that should
be full of right thoughts.”
    ^^Full of Canadian Club, that’s what’s the matter with
him. ... You ought to see the trouble I have getting
him home nights.” You’re the only friend he has,” Agnes
would say, rolling up her eyes.         think it’s noble of you
to stick by him.”
    Margo was paying all the back bills up at the apartment
and had started a small account at the Bowery Savings
Bank just to be on the safe side. She felt she was getting
the hang of the stockmarket a little. Still it made her feel
         328

1244
trashy not working and it gave her the creeps sitting
around in the apartment summer afternoons while Agnes
read Frank Science and Health in a singsong voice, so she
started going around the dress shops to see if she could get
herself a job as a model. want to learn some more about
clothes . .   . mine always look like they were made of old
floursacks,” she explained to Agnes. ^^Are you sure Mr.
Anderson won^t mind?” ^^If he don^t like it he can lump
it,” said Margo, tossing her head.
    In the fall they finally took her on at Piquods new
French gownshop on Fiftyseventh Street. It was tiresome
work but it left her evenings free. She confided to Agnes
that if she ever let Mr. A out of her sight in the evening
some little floosey or other would get hold of him sure as
fate. Agnes was delighted that Margo was out of the show
business. ^^I never felt it was right for you to do that sort
of thing and now I feel you can be a real power for good
with poor Mr. Anderson,” Agnes said. Whenever Margo
told them about a new plunger he had taken on the mar-
ket, Agnes and Frank would hold the thought for Mr.
Anderson.
   Jules Piquot was a middleaged roundfaced Frenchman
with a funny waddle like a duck who thought all the girls
were crazy about him. He took a great fancy to Margo, or
maybe it was that heM found out somewhere that her pro-
tector, as he called it, was a millionaire. He said she must
always keep that beautiful golden tan and made her wear
her hair smooth on her head instead of in the curls she^d
worn it in since she had been a Follies girl. “Vat is te use
to make beautiful clothes for American women if tey look
so healty like from milkin’ a cow?” he said. “Vat you need
to make interestin’ a dress is ’ere,” and he struck himself
with a pudgy ringed fist on the bosom of his silk pleated
shirt, “It is drama. ... In America jdl you care about is

re perfect tirtysix.”
    “Oh, I guess you think we’re very umefined,” said

                                                                                329

1245
Margo.          I only ^ad some capital/’ groaned Piquot,
shaking his head as he went back to his office on the mez-
zanine that was all glass and eggshellwhite with aluminum

fittings.       could make New York te most stylish city in

te vorld.”
    Margo liked it parading around in the Paris models and
in Piquot’s own slinky contraptions over the deep putty-
colored rugs. It was better than shaking her fanny m the
chorus ail right. She didn’t have to get down to the show-
rooms till late. The showrooms were warm and spotless,
with a faint bitter smell on the air of new materials and
dyes and mothballs, shot through with a whiff of scented
Egyptian cigarettes. The models had a little room m the
back where they could sit and read magazines and talk
about beauty treatments and the theaters and the football
season, when there were no customers. There were only
two other girls who came regularly and there weren’t oo
many customers either. The girls said that Piquot was
going broke.
    When he had his sale after Christmas Margo got Agnes
to go down one Monday morning and buy her three stun-
ning gowns for thirty dollars each, she tipped Agnes off
on just what to buy and made out not to know her when
she pranced out to show the new spring models off.
    There wasn’t any doubt any more that Piquot was going
broke. Billcollectors stormed in the little office on the mez-
zanine and everybody’s pay was three weeks in arrears, and
Piquot’s moonshaped face drooped in tiny sagging
wrinkles. Margo decided she’d better start looking around
for another job, especially as Mr. A’s drinking was getting
harder and harder to handle. Every morning she studied
the stockmarket reports. She didn’t have the faith she had
at first in Mi. A’s tips after she’d bought Sinclair one day
and had had to cover her margin and had come out three
hundred dollars in the hole.
    One Saturday there was a great stir around Piquot’s.

         330

1246
Piquot himself kept charging out of his office waving his
short arms, sometimes peevish and sometimes cackling and
giggling, driving the salesladies and models before him
like a new rooster in a henyard. Somebody was coming to
take photographs for Vogue. The photographer when he
finally came was a thinfaced young Jewish boy with a pasty
skin and dark circles under his eyes. He had a regular
big photographer’s camera and a great many flashlight
bulbs all silvercrinkly inside that Piquot kept picking up
and handling in a gingerly kind of way and exclaiming
over.         vonderful invention. ... I vould never ’ave
photographs taken before because I detest explosions and
ten te danger of fire.”
    It was a warm day in February and the steamheated
showrooms were stifling hot. The young man who came
to take the pictures was drenched in sweat when he came
out from under the black cloth. Piquot wouldn’t leave him
alone for a second. He had to take Piquot in his office,
Piquot at the draftingboard, Piquot among the models.
The girls thought their turn would never come. The pho-
tographer kept saying, ^^You let me alone, Mr. Piquot.
... I want to plan something artistic.” The girls all got
to giggling. At last Piquot went off and locked himself in
his office in a pet. They could see him in there through the
glass partition, sitting at his desk with his head in his
hands. After that things quieted down. Margo and the
photographer got along very well. He kept whispering to
her to see what she could do to keep the old gent out of
the pictures. When he left to go up to the loft upstairs
where the dresses were made, the photographer handed
her his card and asked her if she wouldn’t let him take
her picture at his studio some Sunday. It would mean a
great deal to him and it wouldn’t cost her anything. He
was sure he could get something distinctively artistic. She
look his card and said she’d be around the next afternoon.
On the card it said Margolies, Art Photographer.

                                                                                33 *

1247
   That Sunday Mr. A took her out to lunch at the Hotel
Pennsylvania and afterwards she managed to get him to
drive her over to Margolies^ studio. She guessed the young
Jewish boy wasn’t so well off and thought Mr. A might
just as well pay for a set of photographs. Mr. A was sore
about going because he’d gotten his big car out and wanted

to take her for a drive up the Hudson. Anyway he went.

It was funny in Margolies’ studio. Everything was hung
with black velvet and there were screens of different sizes

in black and white and yellow and green and silver stand-
ing all over the big dusty room under the grimy skylights.
The young man acted funny too, as if he hadn’t expected
them. “All this is over,” he said. “This is my brother
Lee’s studio, I’m attending to his clientele while he’s
abroad.  . . . My interests are in the real art of the fu-
ture.” “What’s that?” asked Mr. A, grumpily clipping the
end off a cigar as he looked around for a place to sit down.
“Motionpictures. You see I’m Sam Margolies.               .  , .
You’ll hear of me if you haven’t yet.”
    Mr. A sat down grouchily on a dusty velvet model-
stand. “Wellj make it snappy. ... We want to go driv-
ing.”
    Sam Margolies seemed sore because Margo had just
come in her streetclothes. He looked her over with his
petulant grey eyes for a long time. “I may not be able to
do anything ... I can’t create if I’m hurried. ... I had
seen you stately in Spanish black.” Margo laughed. “I’m
not exactly the type.”
    “The type for a small infanta by Velasquez.” He had
a definite foreign accent when he spoke earnestly. “Well,
I was married to a Spaniard once.   .  . . That was enough
of Spanish grandees and all that kind of thing to last me
a lifetime.” “Wait, wait,” said Sam Margolies, walking all
round her. “I see it, first in streetclothes and then       . .
He ran out of the room and came back with a black lace
shawl. “An infanta in the court of old Spain.”

         33 ^

1248
   ^^You don^t know what it’s like to be married to onc,’^
said Margo. ^^And to live in a house full of noble spl<±
relatives.”
   While Sam Margolies was posing her in her street-
clothes Mr. A was walking up and down fidgeting with
his cigar. It must have been getting cloudy out because
the overhead skylight grew darker and darker. When Sam
Margolies turned the floodlights on her the skylight went
blue, like on the stage. Then when he got to posing her in
the Spanish shawl and made her take her things off and
let her undies down so that she had nothing on but the
shawl above the waist, she noticed that Mr. A had let his
cigar go out and was watching intently. The reflection from
the floodlight made his eyes glint.
    After the photographer was through, when they were
walking down the gritty wooden stairs from the studio,
Mr. A said,         don’t like that guy . . . makes me think
of a pimp.”
    ^^Oh, no, it’s just that he’s very artistic,” said Margo.
^^How much did he say the photographs were?”
    ^Tlenty,” said Mr. A.
    In the xmlighted hall that smelt of cabbage cooking
somewhere, he grabbed her to him and kissed her.
 Through the glass front door she could see a flutter of
snow in the street that was empty under the lamps. ’"Aw,
to hell with him,” he said, stretching his fingers out across
the small of her back. You’re a great little girl, do you
know it? Gosh. I like this house. It makes me think of the
old days.”
    Margo shook her head and blinked. ^^Too bad about
our drive,” she said. ^^It’s snowing.” ^^Drive hell,” said
 Mr. A. ‘^Let’s you and me*act like we was fond of each
other for tonight at least. . .           . First we’ll go to the
 Meadowbrook and have a little bite to drink. . . . Jesus,

 1 wish I’d met you before I got in on the dough, when

 I was livin’ in bedbug alley and all that sort of thing.”

                                                                                 333

1249
   She let her head drop on his chest for a moment. “Char-

ley, youhe number one,^^ she whispered.
   That night he got Margo to say that when Agnes took
Frank out to his sister’s house in New Jersey like she was
planning, to try if a little country air wouldn’t do him
good, she’d go and live with him. “If you knew how i was
sick of this hellraisin’ kind of life,” he told her. She looked
straight up in his boiled blue eyes. “Do you think I like

it, Mr. A?” She was fond of Charley Anderson that night.
    After that Sunday Sam Margolies called up Margo
about every day, at the apartment and at Piquot’s, and sent
her photographs of herself all framed for hanging but she
would never see him. She had enough to think of, what
with being alone in the apartment now, because Agnes had
finally got Frank away to the country with the help of a
practitioner and a great deal of reading of Science and
Healthy and all the bills to pay and daily letters from
Tony who’d found out her address saying he was sick and
begging for money and to be allowed to come around to
see her.
    Then one Monday morning she got down to Piquot’s
late and found the doer locked and a crowd of girls mill-
ing shrilly around in front of it. Poor Piquot had been
found dead in his bathtub from a dose of cyanide of potas-
sium and there was nobody to pay their back wages.
    Piquot’s being dead gave Margo the creeps so that she
didn’t dare go home. She went down to Altman’s and did
some shopping and at noon called up Mr. A’s office to tell
him about Piquot and to see if he wouldn’t have lunch
with her. With poor old Piquot dead and her job gone,
there was nothing to do but to strike Mr. A for a lump
sum. About two grand would fix her up, and she could get
her solitaire diamond Tad had given her out of hock.
Maybe if she teased him he would put her up to something
good on the market. When she called up they said Mr.
Anderson wouldn^ be in his office until three. She went to

         334

1250
Schrafft’s and had chickenpatties for lunch all by herself
in the iniddle of the crowd of cackling women shoppers.
    She already had a date to meet Mr. A that evening at a
French speakeasy on Fiftysecond Street where they often
ate dinner. When she got back from having her hair
washed and waved it was too early to get dressed but she
started fiddling around with her clothes anyway because
she didn^t know what else to do, and it was so quiet and
lonely m the empty apartment. She took a long time doing
her nails and then started trying on one dress after an-
other. Her bed got all piled with rumpled dresses. Every-
thing seemed to have spots on it. She was almost crying
when she at last slipped her furcoat over a paleyellow
evenmgdress that had come from Piquot’s but that she
wasn^t sure about, and went down in the shabby elevator
into the smelly hallway of the apartmenthouse. The ele-
vatorboy fetched her a taxi.
    There were white columns in the hall of the oldfash-
ioned wealthy family residence converted into a restaurant,
and a warm expensive pinkish glow of shaded lights. She
felt cozier than she’d felt all day as she stepped m on the
thick carpet. The headwaiter bowed her to a table and she
sat there sipping an oldfashioned, feeling the men in the
room looking at her and grinning a little to herself when
she thought what the girls at Piquot’s would have said
about a dame who got to a date with the boyfriend ahead
of time. She wished he’d hurry up and come, so that she
could tell him the story and stop imagining how poor old
Piquot must have looked slumped down in his bathtub,
dead from cyanide. It was all on the tip of her tongue
ready to tell.
    Instead of Mr. A a freshlookmg youngster with a long
sandy head and a lantern jaw was leaning over her table.
She straightened herself in her chair to give him a dirty
look, but smjled up at him when he leaned over and said

in a Brooklyn confidential kind of voice, ^^Miss Dowlin’

                                                                                335

1251
. .   . excuse it .    . . Pm Mr. Anderson’s secretary. He
had to hop the plane to Detroit on important business. He
knew you were crazy to go to the Music Box opening, so
he sent me out to get tickets. Here they are, I pretty near
had to blackjack a guy to get ’em for you. The boss said
maybe you’d like to take Mrs. Mandeville.” He had been
                                                                                he drev;
talking fast, like he was afraid she’d shut him up 3
a deep breath and smiled.
    Margo took the two green tickets and tapped them
peevishly on the tablecloth. ^^What a shame ... I don’t
know who I could get to go now, it’s so late. She’s in the
country.”
    ^^My, that’s too bad. ... I don’t suppose I could
pinchhit for the boss?”
                                                               then suddenly she
    “Of all the gall . . .” she began 5
found herself laughing. “But you’re not dressed.”
    “Leave it to me, Miss Dowlin’. ... You eat your sup-
per and I’ll come back in a soup an’ fish and take you to
the show.”
    Promptly at eight there he was back with his hair
slicked, wearing a rustylooking dinnerjacket that was too
short in the sleeves. When they got in the taxi she asked
him if he’d hijacked a waiter and he put his hand over his
mouth and said, “Don’t say a woid, Miss Dowlin’ .           .  .

it’s hired.”
    Between the acts, he pointed out all the celebrities to
her, including himself. He told her that his name was
Clifton Wegman and that everybody called him Cliff and
that he was twentythree years old and could play the man-
dolin and was a little demon with pocket billiards.
    ^Well, Cliff, you’re a likely lad,” she said.
    “Likely to succeed?”
    “I’ll tell the world.”
    “A popular graduate of the New York School of Busi-
ness . . . opportunities wanted.”
    They had the time of their lives together. After the
         336

1252
show Cli£F said he was starved, because he hadn’t had his

supper, what with chasing the theatertickets and the tuck
and all, and she took him to the Club Dover to have a

bite to eat. He surely had an appetite. It was a pleasure

to see him put away a beefsteak with mushrooms. They
had some drinks there and laughed their heads off at the

floorshow, and, when he tried to get fresh in the taxicab,

she slapped his face, but not very hard. That kid could

talk himself out of anything.
    When they got to her door, he said could he come up
and before she could stop herself she’d said yes, if he

acted like a gentleman. He said that wasn’t so easy with

a girl like her but he’d try and they were laughing and

scuffling so in front of her door she dropped her key. They

both stooped to pick it up. When she got to her feet flush-

ing from the kiss he’d given her, she noticed that the man

sitting all hunched up on the stairs beside the elevator was
Tony.
    “Well, goodnight, Cliff, thanks for seeing a poor little

workinggirl home,” Margo said cheerily.
     Tony got to his feet and staggered over towards the

 open door of the apartment. His face had a green pallor

 and his clothes looked like he’d lain in the gutter all night.

     “This is Tony,” said Margo. “He’s a ... a relative

 of mine . .     . not in very good repair.”

     Cliff looked from one to the other, let out a low whistle

 and walked down the stairs.
     “Well, now you can tell me what you mean by hanging

 around my place.   . . . I’ve a great mind to have you ar-

 rested for a burglar.”
     Tony could hardly talk. His lip was bloody and all

 puffed up. “No place to go,” he said. “A gang beat me

 up.” He was teetering so she had to grab the sleeve of his

 filthy overcoat to keep him from falling. “Oh, Tony,” she

 said, “you sure are a mess. Come on in, but if you pull any

                                                                                  337

1253
tricks like you did last time ... I swear to God Vli
break every bone in your body.”
   She put him to bed. Next morning he was so jittery she
had to send for a doctor. The sawbones said he was suffer-
ing from dope and exposure and suggested a cure m a
sanatorium. Tony lay in bed white and trembling. He
cried a great deal, but he was as meek as a lamb and said

yes, he^d do anything the doctor said. Once he grabbed her
band and kissed it and begged her to forgive him for hav-
ing stolen her money so that he could die happy. ^^You
won’t die, not you,” said Margo, smoothing the stiff black
hair off his forehead with her free hand. ^^No such luck.”
She went out for a little walk on the Drive to try to
decide what to do. The dizzysweet clinging smell of the
paraldehyde the doctor had given Tony for a sedative had
made her feel sick.
    At the end of the week when Charley Anderson came
back from Detroit and met her at the place on Fiftysecond
Street for dinner, he looked worried and haggard. She
came out with her sad story and he didn’t take it so well.
He said he was hard up for cash, that his wife had every-
thing tied up on him, that he’d had severe losses on the
               he could raise five hundred dollars for her but
market 3
he’d have to pledge some securities to do that. Then she
said she guessed she’d have to go back to her old engage-
ment as entertainer at the Palms at Miami and he said,
swell, if she didn’t look out he’d come down there and let
her support him.        don’t know why everybody’s got to
thinkin’ I’m a lousy millionaire. All I want is get out of
the whole business with enough jack to let me settle down
to work on motors. If it hadn’t been for this sonofabitchin’
divorce I’d been out long ago. This winter I expect to clean
up and get out. I’m only a dumb mechanic anyway.”
    ^Tou want to get out and I want to get in,” said Margo,
Ipoking him straight in the eye. They both laughed to-
gether. ^‘Aw, let’s go up to your place, since the folks are

1254
away. Pm tired of these lousy speakeasies.” She shook her
head, still laughing. ^^It’s swarming with Spanish rela-
tives,” she said. “We can’t go there.” They got a bag at
his hotel and went over to Brooklyn in a taxi, to a hotel
where they were wellknown as Mr. and Mrs. Dowling.
On the way over in the taxi she managed to get the ante
raised to a thousand.
    Next day she took Tony to a sanatorium up in the
Catskills. He did everything she said like a good little boy
and talked about getting a job when he got out and about
honor and manhood. When she got back to town she called
up the oiEce and found that Mr. A was back in Detroit,
but he’d left instructions with his secretary to get her her
ticket and a drawingroom and fix up everything about the
trip to Miami. She closed up her apartment and the office
attended to storing the furniture and the packing and
everything.
    When she went down to the train there was Cliff wait-
ing to meet her with his wiseguy grin and his hat on the
back of his long thin head. “Why, this certainly is sweet
of him,” said Margo, pinning some lilies of the valley Cliif
had brought her to her furcoat as two redcaps rushed for-
ward to get her bags. “Sweet of who!^” Cliff whispered.
“Of the boss or of me^”
    There were roses in the drawingroom, and Cliff had
bought her Theatre and Variety and ZiVs Weekly and
Town Tofics and Shadowland, “My, this is grand,” she
said.
    He winked. “The boss said to send you off in the best
possible style.” He brought a bottle out of his overcoat
pocket. “That’s Teacher’s Highland Cream.        . .  . Well,
so long.” He made a little bow and went off down the
corridor.
    Margo settled herself in the drawingroom and almost
wished Cliff hadn’t gone so soon. He might at least have
taken longer to say goodby. My, that boy was fresh. The

                                                                                339

1255
train had no sooner started when there he was back, with
his hands in his pants pockets, looking anxious and chew-
ing gum at a great rate. “Well,” she said, frowning, “now
what?”
    “I bought me a ticket to Richmond. ... I don’t travel
enough . . . freedom from office cares.”
    “You’ll get fired.” “Nope . .        . this is Saturday. I’ll be
back bright and early Monday morning.”
    “But he’ll find out.”
    Cliff took his coat off, folded it carefully and laid it on
the rack, then he sat down opposite her and pulled the
door of the drawingroom to. “Not unless you tell him ,”
    She started to get to her feet. “Well, of all the fresh
kids.” He went on in the same tone of voice. “And you
won’t tell him and I won’t tell him about . . . er .              . .”

“^^ut, you damn fool, that’s just my exhusband.” “Weil,
I’m lookin’ forward to bein’ the exboyfriend. . . . No,
honestly, I know you’ll like me .        . . they all like me.”
He leaned over to take her hand. His hand was icycoid.
“No, honest, Margo, why’s it any different from the other
night? Nobody’ll know. You just leave it to me.” Margo
began to giggle. “Say, Cliff, you ought to have a sign on
you.” “Sayin’ what?” “Fresh paint.”
   She went over and sat beside him. Through the shaking
rumble of the train she could feel him shaking. “Why, you
funny kid,” she said. “You were scared to death all the
time.”



                                                  NEWSREEL LXI


                     High high high
                         Uf in the hills
                             Watching the clouds roll by
        340

1256
        genius, hard work, vast resources, and the power and will

to achieve something distinctive, something more beautiful,
something more appealing to the taste and wise judgment of
the better people than are the things which have made the
Coral Gables of today, and that tomorrow may be better, big-
ger, more compellingly beautiful

                           High high high uf tn the hills

        GIANT AIRSHIP BREAKS IN TWO IN
                                     MIDFLIGHT

         here young and old will gather to disport themselves in
fresh invigorating salt water, or to exchange idle gossip in the
loggias which overlook the gleaming pool, and at night the
tinkle of music will tempt you to dance the hours away

                              Shaking hands with idle sky

         It Is the Early Investor Who Will Share to the Fullest
E^ent in the Large and Rafid Enhancement of Values That
Will Follow Such Characterful Development

     Who^s the big man with gold in his mouth?
         Where does he come from? he comes from the south

  TOWN SITE OF JUPITER SOLD FOR TEN MILLION DOLLARS

         like Aladdin with his magic lamf^ the CapitaVist^ the In--
vesior and the Builder converted what was once a desolate
swamp into a wonderful city linked with a network of gUsten-
mg boulevards
                              Sleepy head sleepy head
                                   Open your eyes
                                       Surds in the skies
                                            Stop yawnin^
                                                Ids mornin^

                 ACRES OF GOLD NEAR TAMPA

         like a magnificent shawl of sapphire and jadcy studded
with a myriad of multicolored gemsy the colorful waters of the
lower Atlantic weave a spell of lasting enchantment. The spov

                                                                                         341

1257
where your juture joy^ contentment and haffiness is so sure
that to demate is to 'pass up the outstanding opportunity op your
lijettme

MATE FOLLOWS WIFE IN LEAP FROM WINDOW

           BATTLE DRUG-CRAZED KILLERS

                     Lulu always wants to do
                          What we boys don^t want her to

         A detachment of motorcycle police led the line of march
and cleared the way for the white-clad columns. Behind the
police rose A. P. Schneider, grand marshal. He was followed
by Mr. Sparrow’s band and members of the painters’ union.
The motion picture operators were next in line and the cigar
workers, the glaziers, the musicians, the signpamters and the
Brotherhood of Railway Trainmen followed in the order
named. The meat cutters brought up the rear of the first

division.
         The second division was composed of more than 3,500
carpenters. The third division was led by the Clown Band and
consisted of electricians, blacksmiths, plasterers, printers, press-
men, elevator constructors, postoffice clerks and plumbers and
steamfitters.
         The fourth division was led by ironworkers, brick masons,
the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers, steam and operat-
ing engineers, the Typographical Union, lathers, composition
roofers, sheetmetal workers, tailors and machinists

                                Do'rdt bring Lulu
                                     Pll bring her myself



                                     CHARLEY ANDERSON


     “You watch, Cliff. . . . We’ll knock ’em higher than
 a kite,” Charley said to his secretary, as they came out of
          342

1258
the crowded elevator Into the humming lobby of the
Woolworth Building. ^^Yessiree,” said Cliff, nodding
wisely. He had a long face with a thin parchment skin
drawn tightly from under his brown felt hat over high
cheekbones and thin nose. The lipless mouth never opened
very wide above the thin jaw. He repeated out of the
corner of his mouth, “Yessiree, bobby . . . higher than a
kite.”
    They went through the revolving doors into the five-
o’clock crowd that packed the lower Broadway sidewalks
to the curbs in the drizzly dusk of a raw February day.
Charley pulled a lot of fat envelopes out of rhe pockets of
his English waterproof and handed them to Cliff. ^Hake
these up to the office and be sure they get into Nat Ben-
ton’s personal safe. They can go over to the bank in the
mornin’   .  .  . then you’re through. Call me at nine, see^
You were a little late yesterday.       . . . I’m not goin’ to
worry about anythin’ till then.” ^^Yessir, get a good night’s
sleep, sir,” said Cliff and slid out of sight in the crowd.
    Charley stopped a cruising taxicab and let himself drop
Into the seat. Weather like this his leg still ached. He swal-
lowed a sighj what the hell was the number? ^^Go on up-
town up Park Avenue,” he yelled at the driver. He
couldn’t think of the number of the damn place.    . . . “To
East Fiftysecond Street. I’ll show you the house.” He set-
tled back against the cushions. Christ, I’m tired, he whis-
pered to himself. As he sat slumped back jolted by the
stopping and starting of the taxi in the traffic his belt cut
into his belly. He loosened the belt a notch, felt better,
brought a cigar out of his breastpocket and bit the end off.

    It took him some time to light the cigar. Each time he
had the match ready the taxi started or stopped. When he
did light it it didn’t taste good. “Hell, I’ve smoked too
much today    . . . what I need’s a drink,” he muttered
aloud.
    The taxi moved jerkily uptown. Now and then out of

                                                                                 343

1259
the corner of his eye he caught grey outlines of men in
other taxis and private cars. As soon as he’d made out one
group of figures another took its place. On Lafayette Street
the traffic was smoother. The whole stream of metal, glass,
upholstery, overcoats, haberdashery, fiesh and blood w^s
moving uptown. Cars stopped, started, shifted gears in
unison as if they were run by one set of bells. Charley

sat slumped in the seat feeling the layer of fat on his belly
against his trousers, feeling the fat of his jowl against his

stiff collar. Why the hell couldn’t he remember that num-
ber? He’d been there every night for a month. A vein in

hiS left eyelid kept throbbing.
    “Bonjour, monsieur,” said the plainclothes doorman.
‘^How do you do, mon capitaine,” said Freddy the rat-
toothed proprietor, nodding a sleek black head. ^^Monsieur
dining with Mademoiselle tonight?” Charley shook his
head. have a feller coming to dinner with me at seven.”
^^Bien, monsieur.” ^^Let’s have a scotch and soda while I’m
waitin’ and be sure it ain’t that rotgut you tried to palm
off on me yesterday.”
    Freddy smiled wanly. ^Tt was a mistake, Mr. Anderson,
We have the veritable pinchbottle. You see the wrappings.
It is still wet from the saltwater.” Charley grunted and
dropped into an easychair in the corner of the bar.
    He drank the whiskey off straight and sipped the soda
afterwards. “Hay, Maurice, bring me another,” he called
to the greyhaired old wrinklefaced Swiss waiter. “Bring
me another. Make it double, see? ... in a regular high-
ball glass. I’m tired this evenin’.”
    The shot of whiskey warmed his gut. He sat up
straighter. He grinned up at the waiter. “Well, Maurice,
you haven’t told me what you thought about the market
today.” “I’m not so sure, sir. .         .  . But you know, Mr.
Anderson. ... If you only wanted to you could tell me.”
    Charley stretched his legs out and laughed. “Flyin’

         344

1260
higher than a kite, eh.   .  . . Oh, hell, it’s a bloody chore.

I want to forget it.”
    By the time he saw Eddy Sawyer threading his way
towards him through the faces, the business suits, the hands
holding glasses in front of the cocktailbar, he felt good. He
got to his feet. “How’s the boy, Eddy? How’s things in

little old Deetroit? They all think I’m pretty much of a
sonofabitch, don’t they? Give us the dirt, Eddy.”
    Eddy sighed and sank into the deep chair beside him.
“Well, it’s a long story, Charley.”
    “What would you say to a bacardi with a touch of
absinthe in it? ... All right, make it two, Maurice.”
    Eddy’s face was yellow and wrinkled as a summer apple

that’s hung too long on the tree. When he smiled the
deepening wrinkles shot out from his mouth and eyes over

his cheeks. “Well, Charley old man, it’s good to see you.
 ... You know they’re calling you the boy wizard of avi-

 ation financing?”
     “Is that all they’re callin’ me?” Charley tapped his dead

 cigar against the brass rim of the ashtray. “I’ve heard
 worse things than that.”
     By the time they’d had their third cocktail Charley got

 so he couldn’t stop talking. “Well, you can just teU J. Y.
 from me that there was one day I could have put him out
 on his ass and I didn’t do it. Why didn’t I do it? Because

 I didn’t give a goddam. I really owned my stock. They’d
 hocked everythin’ they had an’ still they couldn’t cover,

 see. ... I thought, hell, they’re friends of mine. Good
 old J. Y. Hell, I said to Nat Benton when he wanted me

 to clean up while the cleanin’ was good . . . they’re

 friends of mine. Let ’em ride along with us. An’ now look

 at ’em gangin’ up on me with Gladys. Do you know how
 much alimony Gladys got awarded her.? Four thousand

 dollars a month. Judge is a friend of her old man . . .

 probably gets a rakeoff. Stripped me of my children . . .

  every damn thing I’ve got they’ve tied up on me. . . .

                                                                                 345

1261
Pretty, ain't it, to take a man’s children away from him?
Well, Eddy, I know you had nothin’ to do with it, but
when you get back to Detroit and see those yellow bastards
who had to get behind a woman’s skirts because they
couldn’t outsmart me any other way       . . . you tell ’em
from me that Pm out to strip ’em to their shirts every

last one of ’em. . . . Pm just beginnin’ to get the hang
of this game. Pve made some dust fly . . . the boy wiz-
ard, eh? ... Well, you just tell ’em they ain’t seen
nothin’ yet. They think Pm just a dumb cluck of an in-

                     just a mechanic like poor old Bill Cermak.
ventor .   .  .

. . . Hell, let’s eat.”
    They were sitting at the table and the waiter was put-
ting differentcolored horsd’oeuvres on Charley’s plate.
“Take it away . . . I’ll eat a piece of steak, nothing else.”
Eddy was eating busily. He looked up at Charley and his
face began to wnnkle into a wisecrack. “I guess it’s another
case of the woman always pays.”
    Charley didn’t laugh. “Gladys never paid for anythin’
in her life. You know just as well as I do what Gladys was
like. All of those Wheatleys are skinflints. She takes after
the old man. . .      . Well, I’ve learned my lesson. . .           .
No more rich bitches. . . . Why, a goddam whore
wouldn’t have acted the way that bitch has acted. . . .
Well, you can just tell ’em, when you get back to your
employers in Detroit ... I know what they sent you for.
... To see if the old boy could still take his liquor. .           .  .
Drinkin’ himself to death, so that’s the story, is it? Well,
I can still drink you under the table, good old Eddy, ain’t
that so? You just tell ’em, Eddy, that the old boy’s as
good as ever, a hell of a lot wiser. . . . They thought
they had him out on his can after the divorce, did they,
well, you tell ’em to wait an’ see. An’ you tell Gladys the
                                                           just once, she needn’t
first time she makes a misstep . .    .
think I haven’t got my operatives watchin’ her .       . . Tell
her I’m out to get the kids back, an’ strip her of every god-
         346

1262
dam thing she’s got.   .  . . Let her go out on the streets^

I don’t give a damn.”
   Eddy was slapping him on the back.                   oldtimerj
I’ve got to run along. . * , Sure good to see you still rid-
ing highj wide and handsome.”
   ^‘^Higher than a kite/’ shouted Charley, bursting out
laughing. Eddy had gone. Old Maurice was trying to
make him eat the piece of steak he’d taken out to heat up*
Charley couldn’t eat. “Take it home to the wife and kid-
dies,” he told Maurice. The speak had cleared for the thea-
tertime lull. “Bring me a bottle of champagne, Maurice
old man, and then maybe I can get the steak down. That’s
how they do it in the old country, eh? Don’t tell me I been
drinkm’ too much ... I know it. . . . When everybody
you had any confidence in has rooked you all down the line
you don’t give a damn, do you, Maurice?”
    A man with closecropped black hair and a closecropped
black mustache was looking at Charley, leaning over a
cocktailglass on the bar. “I say you don’t give a damn,”
Charley shouted at the man when he caught his eye. “Do
you?”
    “Hell, no, got anything to say about it?” said the man,
squaring off towards the table.
    “Maurice, bring this gentleman a glass.” Charley got to
his feet and swayed back and forth bowing politely across
the table. The bouncer, who’d come out from a little door
in back wiping his red hands on his apron, backed out of
the room again. “Anderson my name is. .          . . Glad to
                                .”
meet you, Mr. .     .       “Budkiewitz,” said the blackhaired
man who advanced scowling and swaying a little to the
other side of the table.
    Charley pointed to a chair. “I’m drunk . . . beaucoup
champagny water . . . have a glass.”
    “With pleasure if you put it that way. . . . Always
rather drink than fight. . . . Here’s to the old days of the
Rainbow Division.”

                                                                                3+7

1263
   ^Was you over there

   ^^Sure. Put it there, buddy.”
    ^^Those were the days.”
    ^^And now you come back and over here there^s nothin^
but a lot of doublecrossin^ bastards.”
    ^^Businessmen ... to hell wid ^em     .  . . doublecrossin^
bastards I call ’em.”
    Mr. Budkiewitz got to his feet, scowling again.
what kind of business do you refer
    ^^Nobody’s business. Take it easy, buddy.” Mr. Budkie-
witz sat down again. ^^Oh, hell, bring out another bottle,
Maurice, and have it cold. Ever drunk that wine in
Saumur, Mr. Budkibbitzer?”
    ^^Have I drunk Saumur Why shouldn’t I drink it?
Trained there for three months.”
    ^^That’s what I said to myself. That boy was overseas,”
said Charley.
    ^^Pll tell the cockeyed world.”
    ^What’s your business, Mr. Buchanan?”
    ^T’m an inventor.”

    ^^Just up my street. Ever heard of the Askew-Merritt
starter?”
    He’d never heard of the Askew-Merntt starter and
Charley had never heard of the Autorinse washingmachine
but soon they were calling each other Charley and Paul.
 Paul had had trouble with his wife too, said he was going
to jail before he’d pay her any more alimony. Charley said
 he’d go to jail too.
     Instead they went to a nightclub where they met two
 charming girls. Charley was telling the charming girls how
 he was going to set Paul, good old Paul, up in business, in
 the washingmachine business. They went places in taxicabs
 under the el with the girls. They went to a place m the
 Village. Charley was going to get all the girls the sweet
 pretty little girls jobs in the chorus. Charley was explain-
 ing how he was going to take the shirts off those bastards
          348

1264
In Detroit. He^d get the girls jobs in the chorus so that
they could take their shirts off. It was all very funny.
    In the morning light he was sitting alone in a place with
torn windowshades. Good old Paul had gone and the girls
had gone and he was sitting at a table covered with ciga-
rettestubs and spilt dago red looking at the stinging bright-
ness coming through the worn places in the windowshade,
It wasn^t a hotel or a callhouse, it was some kind of a
dump with tables and it stank of old cigarsmoke and last
night’s spaghetti and tomatosauce and dago red. Some-
body was shaking him. “What time is it?” A fat wop and
a young slickhaired wop in their dirty shirtsleeves were
shaking him. “Time to pay up and get out. Here’s your
bill.”
   A lot of things were scrawled on a card. Charley could
only read it with one eye at a time. The total was seventy-
five dollars. The wops looked threatening.
    “You tell us give them girls twentyfive dollar each on
account.”
    Charley reached for his billroll. Only a dollar. Where
the hell had his wallet gone? The young wop was playing
with a small leather blackjack he’d taken out of his back
pocket. “A century ain’t high for what you spent an’ the
girls an’ all. ... If you f—^k around it’ll cost you more.

. . . You got your watch, ain’t you? This ain’t no clip-
joint.”
    “What time is it^”
    “What time is it, Joe?”
    “Let me call up the office. I’ll get my secretary to come
up.” “What’s the number? What’s his name?” The young
wop tossed up the blackjack and caught it. “I’ll talk to
him. We’re lettin’ you out of this cheap. We don’t want
no hard feelin’s.”
    After they’d called up the office and left word that Mr.
Anderson was sick and to come at once, they gave him
some coffee with rum in it that made him feel sicker than

                                                                               349

1265
ever. At last Cliff was standing over him looking neat and
wellshaved. ^‘Wellj Cliff, Tm not the drinker I used to

be.”
    In the taxicab he passed out cold.
    He opened his eyes in his bed at the hotel. ^^There
must have been knockout drops in the coffee,” he said to

Cliff who sat by the window reading the paper. ‘^Weli,
Mr. Anderson, you sure had us worried. A damn lucky
thing it was they didn’t know who they’d bagged in that
clipjoint. If they had it would have cost us ten grand to get
out of there.”

    ^^Cliff, you’re a good boy. After this you get a raise.”
    ^^Seems to me I’ve heard that story before, Mr. Ander-
son.”
    ^^Benton know?”

    ^^I had to tell him some. I said you’d eaten some bad
fish and had ptomaine poisoning.”
    ^^Not so bad for a young feller. God, I wonder if I’m
gettin’ to be a rummy. .    .  . How are things downtown?”
    ^^Lousy. Mr. Benton almost went crazy trying to get in
touch with you yesterday.”
    ^^Christ, I got a head. . .    . Say, Cliff, you don’t think
I’m gettin’ to be a rummy, do you?”
    ^^Here’s some dope the sawbones left.”
    ^What day of the week is it?” ^^Saturday.” ^^Jesus
Christ, I thought it was Friday.”
    The phone rang. Cliff went over to answer it. ^Tt’s the
massageman.”
    “Tell him to come up.         , . Say, is Benton stayin^ in
town?”
    “Sure he’s in town, Mr. Anderson, he’s trying to get
hold of Merritt and see if he can stop the slaughter. . . ^
Merritt . . .”

    ^^Oh, hell, I’ll hear about it soon enough. Tell this mas-
seur to come in.”
    After the massage, that was agony, especially the cheer-
         350

1266
ful Germanaccent remarks about the weather and the
hockey season made by the big curlyhaired Swede who
looked like a doorman, Charley felt well enough to go to
the toilet and throw up some green bile. Then he took a
cold shower and went back to bed and shouted for Cliif,
who was typing letters in the drawingroom, to ring for
the bellhop to get cracked ice for a rubber icepad to put on
his head.
    He lay back on the pillows and began to feel a litth
better.
    ^^Hay, Cliff, how about lettin’ in the light of day? What
time is it?” “About noon.” “Christ. . .            . Say, Cliff, did
any women call up?” Cliff shook his head. “Thank god.”
    “A guy called up said he was a taxidnver, said you’d
told him you’d get him a job in an airplane factory ... I
told him you’d left for Miami.”
    Charley was beginning to feel a little better. He lay back
in the soft comfortable bed on the crisplylaundered pillows
and looked around the big clean hotel bedroom. The room
was high up. Silvery light poured in through the broad
window. Through the A between the curtains in the win-
dow he could see a piece of sky bright and fleecy as milk-
weed silk. Charley began to feel a vague sense of accom-
plishment, like a man getting over the fatigue of a long
journey or a dangerous mountainclimb.
    “Say, Cliff, how about a small gin and bitters with a lot
of ice in it? ... I think that ’ud probably be the makin^
of me.” “Mr. Anderson, the doc said to swear off and to
take some of that dope whenever you felt like taking a
drink.” “Every time I take it that stuff makes me puke.
What does he think I am, a hophead?” “All right, Mr.
Anderson, you’re the boss,” said Cliff, screwing up his thin
mouth. “Thataboy, Cliff. . . . Then I’ll try some grape-

fruitjuice and if that stays down I’ll take a good breakfast
and to hell wid ’em.     .  .  . Why aren’t the papers here?’^
    “Here they are, Mr. Anderson . . . I’ve got ’em all

                                                                                ,151

1267
turned to the financial section.” Charley looked over the
reports of trading. His eyes wouldn’t focus very well yet.
He still did better by closing one eye. A paragraph in
News and Comment made him sit up.
   ^^Hay, Cliff,” he yelled, ^^did you see this?”
   ^^Sure,” said Cliff.      said things were bad.”
    “But if they’re goin’ ahead it means Merritt and Farrell
have got their proxies sure.”

    Cliff nodded wisely with his head a little to one side.
    “Where the hell’s Benton?” “He just phoned, Mr. An-
derson, he’s on his way uptown now.” “Hay, give me that
drink before he comes and then put all the stuff away and
order up a breakfast.”
    Benton came in the bedroom behind the breakfast tray.
He wore a brown suit and a derby. His face looked like
an old dishcloth in spite of his snappy clothes. Charley
spoke first, “Say, Benton, am I out on my fanny?”
    Benton carefully and slowly took off his gloves and hat
and overcoat and set them on the mahogany table by the
window.
    “The sidewalk is fairly well padded,” he said.
    “All right, Cliff. ... Will you finish up that cor-
respondence?” ’Cliff closed the door behind him gently.
“Merritt outsmarted us?”
    “He and Farrell are playing ball together. All you can
do is take a licking and train up for another bout.”
    “But damn it, Benton . . .”
    Benton got to his feet and walked up and down the
room at the foot of the bed. “No use cussing at me, . . .
I’m going to do the cussing today. What do you think of a
guy who goes on a bender at a critical moment like this?
Yellow, that’s what I call it. . . . You deserved what you
got . . . and I had a hell of a time saving my own hide,
I can tell you. Well, I picked you for a winner, Anderson,
and I still think that if you cut out the funny business you
-could be in the real money in ten years. Now let me tell
         352

1268
you something, young man, youVe gone exactly as far as
you can go on your record overseas, and that was certainly
a hell of a lot further than most. As for this invention
racket ... you know as well as I do there^s no money in

it unless you have the genius for promotion needed to go
with it. You had a big initial success and thought you were
the boy wizard and could put over any damn thing you
had a mind to.”
    ^^Hay, Nat, for Pete’s sake don’t you think I’ve got
brains enough to know that^^  .  . . This darn divorce and
bein’ in hospital so long kinder got me, that’s all.”
    ^^Alibis.”
    ^“What do you think I ought to do^^”
    ^^You ought to pull out of this town for a while. .           . -
How about your brother’s business out in Minnesota?”
“Go back to the sticks and sell tin lizzies          .  . . that’s a
swell future.” “Where do you think Henry Ford made his
money?” “I know. But he keeps his dealers broke.         .  . .
What I need’s to get in good physical shape. I always have
a good time in Florida. I might go down there and lay
 around in the sun for a month.”
     “O.K. if you keep out of that landboom.”
     “Sure, Nat, I won’t even play poker          .  .  . I’m goin’
 down there for a rest. Get my leg in real good shape.
 Then when I come back we’ll see the fur fly. After all
 there’s still that Standard Airparts stock.”
     “No longer listed.”
     “Check.”
     “Well, optimist, my wife’s expecting me for lunch.

 . . . Have a good trip.”
     Benton went out. “Hay, Cliiff,” Charley called through
 the door. “Tell ’em to come and get this damn breakfast
 tray. It didn’t turn out so well. And phone Parker to get
 the car in shape. Be sure the tires are all O.K. I’m pullin’
 out for Florida Monday.”
     In a moment Cliff stuck his head in the door. His face

                                                                                 353

1269
was red. ^^Are you . .  will you be needing me down
there, sir?” “No, I^U be needin’ you here to keep an eye on
the boys downtown. ... I got to have somebody here I
can trust. . . . I’ll tell you what I will have you do
though ... go down to Trenton and accompany Miss
Powlin’ down to Norfolk. I’ll pick her up there. She’s in
Trenton visitin’ her folks. Her old man just died or some-
thin’. You’d just as soon do that, wouldn’t you? It’ll give
you a little trip.”
    Charley was watching Cliff’s face. He screwed his mouth
further to one side and bowed like a butler. “Very good,
sir,” he said.
    Charley lay back on the pillows again. His head was
throbbing, his stomach was still tied up in knots. When he
closed his eyes dizzy red lights bloomed in front of them.
He began to think about Jim and how Jim had never paid
over his share of the old lady’s money he’d put into the
business. Anyway he ain’t got a plane, two cars, a suite
at the Biltmore and a secretary that’ll do any goddam
thing in the world for you, and a girl like Margo. He tried
to remember how her face looked, the funny amazed way
 she opened her eyes wide when she was going to make z
 funny crack. He couldn’t remember a damn thing, only
the sick feeling he had all over and the red globes bloom-
ing before his eyes. In a little while he fell asleep.
    He was still feeling so shaky when he started south that
he took Parker along to drive the car. He sat glumly in
his new camelshair coat with his hands hanging between
his knees staring ahead through the roaring blank of the
Holland Tunnel, thinking of Margo and Bill Edwards
the patent lawyer he had to see in Washington about a
‘suit, and remembering the bills in Cliff’s desk drawer and
wondering where the money was coming from to fight this
patent suit against Askew-Merritt. He had a grand in bills
in his pocket and that made him feel good anyway. Gosh,
money’s a great thing, he said to himself.

         354

1270
   They came out of the tunnel into a rainygrey morning
and the roar and slambanging of trucks through Jersey
City. Then the traffic gradually thinned and they were
going across the flat farmlands of New Jersey strawcolored
and ruddy with winter. At Philadelphia Charley made
Parker drive him to Broad Street.          haven’t got the pa--
tience to drive, Pll take the afternoon train. Come to the
Waldman Park when you get in.”
   He hired a drawingroom in the parlorcar and went and
lay down to try to sleep. The train clattered and roared so
and the grey sky and the lavender fields and yellow pas-*
tures and the twigs of the trees beginning to glow red and
green and paleyellow with a foretaste of spring made him
feel so blue, so like howling like a dog, that he got fed up
with being shut up in the damn drawingroom and went
back to the clubcar to smoke a cigar.
    He was slumped in the leather chair fumbling for the
cigarclipper in his vest pocket when the portly man in the
next chair looked up from a bluecovered sheaf of law*
papers he was poring over. Charley looked into the black
eyes and the smooth bluejowled face and at the bald head

still neatly plastered with a patch of black hair shaped like
a bird’s wing, without immediately recognizing it.
    “Why, Charley ma boy, I reckon you must be in love.’^
Charley straightened up and put out his hand. “Hello,
senator,” he said, stammering a little like he used to in
the old days. “Goin’ to the nation’s capital?” “Such is my
unfortunate fate.” Senator Planet’s eyes went searching all
over him, “Charley, I hear you had an accident.”
    “Pve had a series of them,” said Charley, turning red.
Senator Planet nodded his head understandingly and made
a clucking noise with his tongue, “Too bad .      .  . too bad

, . . Well, sir, a good deal of water has run imder the
bridge since you and young Merritt had dinner with me
that night in Washington.      . . . Well, we’re none of us
gettin’ any younger.” Charley got the feeling that the

                                                                                35S

1271
senator’s black eyes got considerable pleasure from ex-
ploring the flabby lines where his neck met his collar and
the bulge of his belly against his vest. ‘^Wellj we’re none
of us getting any younger/’ the senator repeated. “You
are, senator. I swear you look younger than you did the
last time I saw you.”
    The senator smiled. “Well, I hope you’ll forgive me for
makin’ the remark .    . . but it’s been one of the most sen-
sational careers I have had the luck to witness in many
years of public life.”
    “Well, it’s a new industry. Things happen fast.”
    “Unparalleled,” said the senator. “We live in an age
of unparalleled progress . . . everywhere except in
Washington. ... You should come down to our quiet

little village more often. ... You have many friends
there. I see by the papers, as Mr. Dooley used to say, that
there’s been considerable reorganization out with you folks
in Detroit. Need a broader capital base, I suppose.”
    “A good many have been thrown out on their broad
capital bases,” said Charley. He thought the senator would
never quit laughing. The senator pulled out a large ini-
tialed silk handkerchief to wipe the tears from his eyes and
brought his small pudgy hand down on Charley’s knee.
“God almighty, we ought to have a drink on that.”
    The senator ordered whiterock from the porter and mys-
teriously wafted a couple of slugs of good rye whiskey
into it from a bottle he had in his Gladstone bag. Charley
began to feel better. The senator was saying that some very
interesting developments were to be expected from the
development of airroutes. The need for subsidies was
pretty generally admitted if this great nation was to catch
up on its lag in air transportation. The question would be
of course which of a number of competing concerns en-
joyed the confidence of the Administration. There was
more in this airroute business than there ever had been in
supplying ships and equipment. “A question of the con-
        356

1272
fidence of the Administratlorij ma boy.” At the word con-
fidence. Senator Planet’s black eyes shone. ^^That’s why,
ma boy, I’m glad to see you up here. Stick close to our
little village on the Potomac, ma boy.”
   ^^Check,” said Charley.
   “When you’re in Miami, look up my old friend Homer
Cassidy. .  .  . He’s got a nice boat . . , he’ll take you out
fishin’  .  .  . I’ll write him, Charley. If I could get away
I might spend a week down there myself next month.
There’s a world of money bein’ made down there right
now.”
   “I sure will, senator, that’s mighty nice of you, senator.”
   By the time they got into the Union station Charley and
the senator were riding high. They were talking trunklines
and connecting lines, airports and realestate. Charley
couldn’t make out whether he was hiring Senator Planet
for the lobbying or whether Senator Planet was hiring
him. They parted almost affectionately at the taxistand.
    Next afternoon he drove down through Virginia. It was
a pretty, sunny afternoon. The judastrees were beginning
to come out red on the sheltered hillsides. He had two
bottles of that good rye whiskey Senator Planet had sent
up to the hotel for him. As he drove he began to get sore
at Parker the chauffeur. All the bastard did was get rake-
offs on the spare parts and gas and oil. Here he’d charged
up eight new tires m the last month, what did he do with
tires anyway, eat them? By the time they were crossing
the tollbridge into Norfolk Charley was sore as a crab.
He had to hold himself in to keep from hauling off and
giving the bastard a crack on the sallow jaw of his smooth
flunkey’s face. In front of the hotel he blew up.
    “Parker, you’re fired. Here’s your month’s wages and
your trip back to New York. If I see your face around this
town tomorrow I’ll have you run in for theft. You know
what Pm referrin’ to just as well as I do. You damn
chauffeurs think you’re too damn smart. I know the whole

                                                                               357

1273
racket, see. ... I have to work for my dough just as'
hard as you do. Just to prove it Pm goin’ to drive myself
from now on.” He hated the man’s smooth unmoving face.
    “Very well, sir,” Parker said coolly. “Shall I return you
the uniform?”
    “You can take the uniform and shove it up your .       . .”

Charley paused. He was stamping up and down red in the
face on the pavement at the hotel entrance in a circle of
giggling colored bellboys. “Here, boy, take those bags in
and have my car taken around to the garage. . .          . All
right, Parker, you have your instructions.”
    He strode into the hotel and ordered the biggest double
suite they had. He registered in his own name. “Mrs.
Anderson will be here directly.” Then he called up the
other hotels to find out where the hell Margo was. “Hello,
kid,” he said when at last it was her voice at the end of
the wire. “Come on over. You’re Mrs. Anderson and no
questions asked. Aw, to heU with ’em} nobody’s goin’ to
dictate to me what I’ll do or who I’ll see or what I’m
goin’ to do with my money. Pm through with all that.
Come right around. Pm crazy to see you. . .
    When she came in, followed by the bellhop with the
bags, she certainly looked prettier than ever. “Well, Char-
ley,” she said, when the bellhop had gone out, “this sure
is the cream de la cream. ... You must have hit oil.”
After she’d run all around the rooms she came back and
snuggled up to him. “I bet you been giving ’em hell on
the market.” “They tried to put somethin’ over on me,
but it can’t be done. Take it from me. . . . Have a drink,
Margo. . . . Let’s get a little bit cockeyed you and me,
Margo. . . . Christ, I was afraid you wouldn’t come.”
    She was doing her face in the mirror. “Me? Why I’m
only a pushover,” she said in that gruff low tone that made
him shiver all up his spine.

, “Say, where’s Cliff?”
    “Our hatchetfaced young friend who was kind enough

1274
to accompany me to the meeting with the lord and master?
He pulled out on the six o’clock train.”
   ‘^The hell he did. I had some instructions for him.”
   ^^He said you said be in the office Tuesday morning and
he’d do it if he had to fly. Say, Charley, if he’s a sample
of your employees they must worship the ground you
walk on. He couldn’t stop talking about what a great guy
you were.”
    ^Well, they know I’m regular, been through the mill

. . . understand their point of view. It wasn’t so long ago
I was workin’ at a lathe myself.”
    Charley felt good. He poured them each another drink*
Margo took his and poured half of the rye back into the
bottle. “Don’t want to get too cockeyed, Mr. A,” she said
in that new lo,w caressing voice.
    Charley grabbed her to him and kissed her hard on the
mouth. “Christ, if you only knew how I’ve wanted to
have a really swell woman all to myself. I’ve had some
awful bitches . .     . Gladys, God, what a bitch she was.
She pretty near ruined me . . . tried to strip me of every
cent I had in the world     . . . ganged up on me with guys
I thought were my friends. . . . But you just watch, little

girl. I’m goin’ to show ’em. In five years they’ll come
crawlin’ to me on their bellies. I don’t faiow what it is, but
I got a kind of feel for the big money ... Nat Benton
says I got it ... I know I got it. I can travel on a hunch^
see. Those bastards all had money to begin with.”
    After they’d ordered their supper and while they were
having just one little drink waiting for it, Margo brought
out some bills she had in her handbag. “Sure, I’ll handle
’em right away.” Charley shoved them into his pocket
without looking at them. “You know, Mr. A, I wouldn’t
have to worry you about things like that if I had an ac-
count in my own name.” “How about ten grand in the
First National Bank when we get to Miami?”
    ^^Suit yourself, Charley . * * I never did understand

                                                                                359

1275
more money than my week’s salary, you know that. That’s

all any real trouper understands. I got cleaned out fixing
the folks up in Trenton. It certainly costs money to die in

this man’s country.”
    Charley’s eyes filled with tears. ^^Was it your dad,
Margery?”
    She made a funny face. “Oh, no. The old man bumped
off from too much Keeley cure when I was a little twirp
with my hair down my back, ... This was my step-
mother’s second husband. I’m fond of my stepmother, be-
lieve it or not,     . .  . She’s been the only friend I had in

this world. I’ll tell you about her someday. It’s quite a
jstory.”
    “How much did it cost? I’ll take care of it.”
    Margo shook her head. “I never loaded my relations
on any man’s back,” she said.
    When the waiter came in with a tray full of big silver
dishes followed by a second waiter pushing in a table
already set, Margo pulled apart from Charley. “Well, this

is the life,” she whispered in a way that made him laugh.
    Driving down was a circus. The weather was good. As
they went further south there began to be a green fuzz of
spring on the woods. There were flowers in the pinebar-
rens. Birds were singing. The car ran like a dream.
Charley kept her at sixty on the concrete roads, driving
carefully, enjoying the driving, the good fourwheel brakes,
the easy whir of the motor under the hood. Margo was a
smart girl and crazy about him and kept making funny
cracks. They drank just enough to keep them feeling good.
They made Savannah late that night and felt so good they
got so tight there the manager threatened to run them
out of the big old hotel. That was when Margo threw
an ashtray through the transom.
    They’d been too drunk to have much fun in bed that
night and woke up with a taste of copper in their mouths
and horrible heads. Margo looked haggard and green and
         360

1276
saggy under the eyes before she went in to take her bath.
Charley made her a prairie oyster for breakfast like he said
the English aviators used to make over on the other side,
and she threw it right up without breaking the eggyolk.
She made him come and look at it in the toilet before she
pulled the chain. There was the raw eggyolk looking up
at them like it had just come out of the shell. They
couldn^t help laughing about it in spite of their heads.
    It was eleven o^clock when they pulled out, Charley
drove kind of easy along the winding road through the
wooded section of southern Georgia, cut with inlets and
saltmarshes from which cranes flew up and once a white
flock of egrets. They felt pretty pooped by the time they
got to Jacksonville. Neither of them could eat anything
but a lambchop washed down with some lousy gin they
paid eight dollars a quart for to the colored bellboy who
claimed it was the best English gin imported from Nassau
the night before. They drank the gin with bitters and went
to bed.
    Driving down from Jax to Miami the sun was real hot.
Charley wanted to have the top down to get plenty of air
but Margo wouldn^t hear of it. She made him laugh about

It.        girPll sacrifice anything for a man except her com-
plexion.” They couldn’t eat on the way down, though
Charley kept tanking up on the gin. When they got into
Miami they went right to the old Palms where Margo
used to work and got a big ovation from Joe Kantor and
Eddy Palermo and the boys of the band. They all said it
looked like a honeymoon and kidded about seeing the
marriagelicense. ^^Merely a chance acquaintance . . .
something I picked up at the busstation in Jax,” Margo
kept saying. Charley ordered the best meal they had in
the house and drinks all around and champagne. They
danced all evening in spite of his game leg. When he
passed out they took him upstairs to Joe and Mrs. Kantor’a
own room. When he began to wake up Margo was sitting

                                                                                361

1277
fully dressed looking fresh as a daisy on the edge of the
bed. It was late in the morning. She brought him up break-

fast on a tray herself.
    ^^Look here, Mr.          she said. ^^You came down here
for a rest. No more nightclubs for a while. IVe rented us
a little bungalow down on the beach and we’ll put you up
at the hotel to avoid the breath of scandal and you’ll like

it. What we need’s the influence of the home.      . . . And
you and me, Mr. A, we’re on the wagon.”
    The bungalow was in Spanishmission style, and cost a
iot, but they sure had a good time at Miami Beach, They
played the dograces and the roulettewheels and Charley
got in with a bunch of allnight pokerplayers through
Homer Cassidy, Senator Planet’s friend, a big smiling cul-
tured whitehaired southerner in a baggy linen suit, who
came round to the hotel to look him up. After a lot of
talking about one thing and another, Cassidy got around
to the fact that he was buying up options on property for
the new airport and would let Charley in on it for the sake
of his connections, but he had to have cash right away. At
poker Charley’s luck was great, he always won enough to
have a big roll of bills on him, but his bankaccount was a
dog of a different stripe. He began burning up the wires to
Nat Benton’s office in New York.
                                                                      the only times
    Margo tned to keep him from drinking j
he could really get a snootful were v’-hen he went out fish-
ing with Cassidy. Margo wouldn’t go fishing, she said she
didn’t like the way the fish looked at her when they came
up out of the water. One day he’d gone down to the dock
to go fishing with Cassidy but found that the norther that
had come up that morning was blowing too hard. It was
damn lucky because just as Charley was leaving the dock
a Western Union messengerboy came up on his bike. The
wnd was getting sharper every minute and blew the chilly
dust in Charley’s face as he read the telegram. It was
from the senator: auministration prepares oats for
         362

1278
PEGASUS. As soon as he got back to the beach Charley
talked to Benton over longdistance. Next day airplane
stocks bounced when the news came over the wires of ^
bill introduced to subsidize airlines. Charley sold every-
thing he had at the top, covered his margins and was sit-
ting pretty when the afternoon papers killed the story^
   A week later he started to rebuy at twenty points lower*.
Anyway heM have the cash to refinance his loans and go
in with Cassidy on the options. When he told Cassidy he
was ready to go in with him they went out on the boat
to talk things over. A colored boy made them mintjuleps.
They sat in the stern with their rods and big straw hata
to keep the sun out of their eyes and the juleps on a table
behind them. When they got to the edge of the blue water
they began to troll for sailfish.
    It was a day of blue sky with big soft pinkishwhite
clouds lavender underneath drifting in the sun. There was
enough wind blowing against the current out in the Gulf
Stream to make sharp choppy waves green where they
broke and blue and purple in the trough. They followed
the long streaks of mustardcolored weed but they didn’t
see any sailfish. Cassidy caught a dolphin and Charley lost
one. The boat pitched so that Charley had to keep working
on the juleps to keep his stomach straight.
    Most of the morning they cruised back and forth in
front of the mouth of the Miami River. Beyond the steep
dark waves they could see the still sunny brown water of
the bay and against the horizon the new buildings spar-
kling white among a red web of girder construction,
“Buildin’, that’s what I like to see,” said Homer Cassidy,
waving a veined hand that had a big old gold sealring on

it towards the city. ^^And it’s just beginnin’. . . , Why,
boy, I kin remember when Mxamah was the jumpin’oflE
place, a little collection of brokendown shacks between the
railroad and the river, and I tell you the mosquitoes were

fierce. There were a few crackers down here growin’ early

                                                                                363

1279
 tomatoes and layin’ abed half the time with chills and
 fever  , .  . and now look at it     . . . an’ up m New York
they try to tell you the boom ain’t sound.” Charley nodded
without speaking. He was having a tussle with a fish on
his line. His face was getting red and his hand was
cramped from reeling. ^^Nothin’ but a small bonito,” said
Cassidy.      .  . The way they try to tell you the fishin’
ain’t any good .    . . that’s all propaganda for the West
Coast. .  .  . Boy, I must admit that I saw it cornin’ years
ago when I was workin’ with old Flagler. There was a
man with vision. ... I went down with him on the first
train that went over the overseas extension into Key West
... I was one of the attorneys for the road at the time.
Schoolchildren threw roses under his feet all the way from
his private car to the carriage. ... We had nearly a
thousand men carried away m hurricanes before the line
was completed .  . . and now the new Miamah .        .  . an’
Miamah Beach, what do you think of Miamah Beach?
It’s Flagler’s dream come true.”
    ^Well, what I’d like to do,” Charley began and stopped
to take a big swig of the new julep the colored boy had
just handed him. He was beginning to feel wonderful now
that the little touch of seasickness had gone. Cassidy’s fish-
ing guide had taken Charley’s rod up forward to put a new
hook on it, so Charley was sitting there in the stern of the
motorboat feeling the sun eat into his back and little flecks
of salt spray drying on his face with nothing to do but sip
the julep, with nothing to worry about. ^^Cassidy, this sure
is the life .    . . why can’t a guy do what he wants to with
his life? I was just goin’ to say what I want to do is get
out of this whole racket .      .  . investments, all that crap.
... I’d like to get out with a small pile and get a house
and settle down to monkeyin’ around with motors and de-
signin’ planes and stuff like that. ... I always thought
if I could pull out with enough jack I’d like to build me
a windtunnel all my own . .     . you know that’s what they
        364

1280
test out model planes in.” “Of course,” said Cassidy, “it’s
aviation that’s goin’ to make Miami. . . . Think of it,
eighteen, fourteen, ten hours from New York. ... I
don’t need to tell you . .         . and you and me and the
Senator .  .  . we’re right in among the foundin’ fathers
with that airport.    .  .  . Well, boy, I’ve waited all ma life
to make a real killin’. All ma life I been servin’ others
... on the bench, railroad lawyer, all that sort of thing.

, . . Seems to me about time to make a pile of ma own.”
    “Suppose they pick some other place, then we’ll be
holdin’ the bag. After all it’s happened before,” said
Charley.
    “Boy, they can’t do it. You know yourself that that’s
the ideal location and then ... I oughtn’t to be tellin’
you this but you’ll find it out soon anyway .      .  . well, you
know our Washington friend, well, he’s one of the for-
wardestlooking men in this country.     .  .  That money I
put up don’t come out of Homer Cassidy’s account because
Homer Cassidy’s broke. That’s what’s worryin’ me right
this minute. I’m merely his agent. And in all the years
I’ve been associated with Senator Planet upon ma soul and
body I’ve never seen him put up a cent unless it was a sure
thing.”
    Charley began to grin. “Well, the old sonofabitch.”
Cassidy laughed. “You know the one about a nod’s as good
as a wink to a blind mule. How about a nice Virginia ham
sandwich?”
    They had another drink with the sandwiches. Charley
got to feeling like talking. It was a swell day. Cassidy was
a prince. He was having a swell time. “Funny,” Charley
said, “when I first saw Miami it was from out at sea like

this. I never would have thought I’d be down here shov-/

elin’ in the dough.       .  .  . There weren’t all those tal'

buildin’s then either. I was goin’ up to New York on a

coastin’ boat. I was just a kid and I’d been down to New
Orleans for the Mardi Gras and I tell you I was broke,

                                                                               363

1281
I got on the boat to come up to New fork and got to

pallin’ with a Florida cracker ... he was a funny guy.

 . . We went up to New York together. He said the
thing to do was get over an’ see the war, so him and me
like a pair of damn fools we enlisted in one of those volun-
teer ambulance services. After that I switched to aviation.
That’s how I got started in my line of business. Miami
didn’t mean a thing to me then.”
    “Well, Flagler gave me ma start,” said Cassidy. “And
I’m not ashamed to admit it . .        . buyin’ up rightofway
for the Florida East Coast.    . . . Flagler started me and
he started Miamah.”
    That night when they got in sunburned and a little
drunk from the day on the Gulf Stream they tucked all
the options away in the safe in Judge Cassidy’s office and
went over to the Palms to relax from business cares.
Margo wore her silver dress and she certainly looked
stunning. There was a thin dark Irishlooking girl there
named Eileen who seemed to know Cassidy from way
back. The four of them had dinner together, Cassidy got
good and tight and opened his mouth wide as a grouper’s
talking about the big airport and saying how he was going
to let the girls in on some lots on the deal. Charley was
drunk, but he wasn’t too drunk to know Cassidy ought to
keep his trap shut. When he danced with Eileen he talked
earnestly in her ear telling her she ought to make the boy-
friend keep his trap shut until the thing was made public
from the proper quarters. Margo saw them with their
heads together and acted the jealous bitch and started mak-
ing over Cassidy to beat the cars. When Charley got her
to dance with him she played dumb and wouldn’t answer
tvhen he spoke to her.
    He left her at the table and went over to have some
drinks at the bar. There he got into an argument with a
‘skinny guy who looked like a cracker. Eddy Palermo, with
an oiiy smile on his face the shape and color of an olive,
         366

1282
ran over and got between them. “You can’t fight this
gentleman, Mr. Anderson, he’s oixr county attorney. . . .

I know you gentlemen would like each other .         . . Mr.
Pappy, Mr. Anderson was one of our leading war aces.”
    They dropped their fists and stood glaring at each other
with the little wop nodding and grinning between them.
Charley put out his hand. ‘'All right, put it there, pal,”
he said. The county attorney gave him a mean look and
put his hands in his pockets. “Coimty attorney s—t,” said
Charley. He was reeling. He had to put his hand against

the wall to steady himself. And he turned and walked out
the door. Outside he found Eileen who’d just come out of
the ladies’ room and was patting back her sleek hair in

front of the mirror by the hatchecking stand. He felt
choked with the whiskey and the cigarsmoke and the
throbbing hum of the band and the shuffle of feet. He had

to get outdoors. “Come on, girlie, we’re goin’ for a ride,

get some air.” Before the girl could open her mouth he’d
dragged her out to the parkinglot. “Oh, but I don’t think
we ought to leave the others,” she kept saying. “They’re

too goddam drunk to know. I’ll bring you back in five

 minutes. A little air does a little girl good, especially a

 pretty little girl like you.”
    The gears shrieked because he didn’t have the clutch
 shoved out. The car stalled} he started the motor again
 and immediately went into high. The motor knocked for

 a minute but began to gather speed. “See,” he said, “not

 a bad little bus.” As he drove he talked out of the corner

 of his mouth to Eileen. “That’s the last time I go into

 that dump.   . . . Those little cracker politicians fresh out

 of the turpentine camps can’t get fresh with me. I can buy
 and sell ’em too easy like buyin’ a bag of peanuts. Like that

 bastard Farrell. I’ll buy and seU him yet. You don’t know
 who he is but all you need to know is he’s a crook, one of

 the biggest crooks in the country, an’ he thought, the whole
 damn lot of ’em thought, they’d put me out like they did

                                                                                 367

1283
poor old Joe Askew. But the man with the knowhow, the
boy who thinks up the gadgets, they can’t put him out. I
can outsmart ’em at their own game too. We got somethin’
bigger down here than they ever dreamed of. And the
Administration all fixed up. This is goin’ to be big, little

girl, the biggest thing you ever saw and I’m goin’ to let
you in on it. We’ll be on easystreet from now on. And
when you’re on easystreet you’ll all forget poor old
Charley Anderson the boy that put you wise.”
    ^^Oh, it’s so cold,” moaned Eileen. ^^Let’s go back. I’m
shivering.” Charley leaned over and put his arm round her
shoulders. As he turned the car swerved. He wrenched it
back onto the concrete road again. ^^Oh, please do be care-
ful, Mr. Anderson. . . . You’re doing eightyfive now.

.  .  . Oh, don’t scare me, please.”
    Charley laughed. ^^My, what a sweet little girl. Look,
we’re down to forty just bowlin’ pleasantly along at forty.
Now we’ll turn and go back, it’s time little chickens were
in bed. But you must never be scared in a car when I’m
driving. If there’s one thing I can do it’s drive a car. But
I don’t like to drive a car. Now if I had my own ship here.
How would you like to take a nice trip m a plane? I’da
had it down here before this but it was in hock for the
repair bills. Had to put a new motor in. But now I’m on
easystreet. I’ll get one of the boys to fly it down to me.
Then we’ll have a real time. You an’ me an’ Margo. Old
Margo’s a swell girl, got an awful temper though. That’s
one thing I can do, I know how to pick the women.”
    When they turned to run back towards Miami they saw
the long streak of the dawn behind the broad barrens
dotted with dead pines and halfbuilt stucco houses and
closed servicestations and dogstands.
    <<Now the wind’s behind us. We’ll have you back before
you can say Jack Robinson.” They were running along
beside a railroad track. They were catching up on two red
lights.        wonder if that’s the New York train,” They
         ^68

1284
were catching up on it, past the lighted observation car,
past the sleepers with no light except through the ground-
glass windows of the dressingrooms at the ends of the
cars. They were creeping up on the baggagecar and mail-
cars and the engine, very huge and tall and black with a
little curling shine from Charley’s headlights in the dark.
The train had cut off the red streak of the dawn. ^^Hell,
they don’t make no speed.” As they passed the cab the
whistle blew. ^^Hell, I can beat him to the crossin’.” The
lights of the crossing were ahead of them and the long
beam of the engine’s headlight, that made the red and
yellow streak of the dawn edging the clouds very pale and
far away. The bar was down at the crossing. Charley
stepped on the gas. They crashed through the bar, shat-
tering their headlights. The car swerved around sideways.
Their eyes were full of the glare of the locomotive head-
light and the shriek of the whistle. ^^Don’t be scared, we’re
through,” Charley yelled at the girl. The car swerved
around on the tracks and stalled.
    He was jabbing at the starter with his foot. The crash
wasn’t anything. When he came to he knew right away he
was in a hospital. First thing he began wondering if he was
going to have a hangover. He couldn’t move. Eveiything
was dark. From way down in a pit he could see the ceiling,
Then he could see the peak of a nurse’s cap and a nurse
leaning over him. All the time he was talking. He couldn’t
stop talking.
    ^Well, I thought we were done for. Say, nurse, where
did we crack up? Was it at the airport? I’d feel better if I
could remember. It was this way, nurse ... I’d taken
that little girl up to let her get the feel of that new
Boeing ship   , . . you know the goldarned thing. ... I
was sore as hell at somebody, must have been my wife,
poor old Gladys, did she give me a dirty deal? But now
after this airport deal I’ll be buyin’ an’ sellin’ the whole

                                                                              - 369

1285
bunch of them. Say, nurse, what happened? Was it at the
airport?’^
   The nurse’s face and her hair were yellow under the
white cap. She had a thin face without lips and thin hands
that went past his eyes to smooth the sheet under his chin.
   ^^You must try and rest,’^ she said. “Or else I’ll have to
give you another hypodermic.”
    “Say, nurse, are you a Canadian? I bet you’re a
Canadian.”
    “No, I’m from Tennessee.   . .   . Why?”
    “My mistake. You see always when I’ve been in a hos-
pital before the nurses have been Canadians. Isn’t it kinder
dark in here^^ I wish I could tell you how it happened.
Have they called the office^ I guess maybe I drink too
much. After this I attend strictly to business. I tell you a
man has to keep his eyes open in this game.       . . . Say,
can’t you get me some water?”
    “I’m the night nurse. It isn’t day yet. You try and get
some sleep.”
    “I guess they’ve called up the office. I’d like Stauch to
take a look at the ship before anything’s touched. Funny,
nurse. I don’t feel much pain, but I feel so terrible.”
    “That’s just the hypodermics,” said the nurse’s brisk low
voice. “Now you rest quietly and in the morning you’ll
wake up feeling a whole lot better. You can only rinse
out your mouth with this.”
    “Check.”
    He couldn’t stop talking, “You see it was this way. I
had some sort of a wrangle with a guy, Axt you listenin’,
nurse? I guess I’ve got a kind of a chip on my shoulder
since they’ve been gangin’ up on me so. In the old days I
used to think everybody was a friend of mine, see. Now
I know they’re all crooks . . . even Gladys, she turned
out the worst crook of the lot. ... I guess it’s the hang-
over makes me so terribly thirsty.”
    The nurse was standing over him again. “I’m afraid
        370

1286
we^ll have to give you a little of the sleepy stuff, brother,

. .   . Now just relax. Think of somethin’ nice. That’s a
good boy.”
    He felt her dabbing at his arm with something cold and
wet. He felt the prick of the needle. The hard bed where
he lay awake crumbled gradually under him. He was sink-
ing, without any sweetness of sleep coming on, he w^as
sinking into dark.
    This time it was a stout starched woman standing over
him. It was day. The shadows were different. She was
poking some papers under his nose. She had a hard cheer-
ful voice. “Good morning, Mr. Anderson, is there any-
thing I can do for youi^”
    Charley was still down in a deep well. The room, the
stout starched woman, the papers were far away above him
somewhere. All around his eyes was stinging hot.
    “Say, I don’t feel as if I was all there, nurse.”
    “I’m the superintendent. There are a few formalities if
you don’t mind ... if you feel well enough.”
    “Did you ever feel like it had all happened before?*  , . .

Say, where, I mean what town . . . ? Never mind, don’t
tell me, I remember it all now.”
    “I’m the superintendent. If you don’t mind, the ofEce
would like a check for your first week in advance and then
there are some other fees.”
    “Don’t worry. I’ve got money. ... For God’s sake get
me a drink.”
    “It’s just the regulations.”
    “There must be a checkbook in my coat somewhere. . . .
Or get hold of Cliff . . . Mr. Wegman, my secretary. . . .
He can make out a check for you.”
    “Now don’t you bother about anything, Mr. Ander-
son. .   . . The office has made out a blank check. I’ll fill

in the name of the bank. You sign it. That will be two
hundred and fifty dollars on account.”

                                                                                371

1287
    “Bankers’ Trust, New York.        .  .  . Gosh, I can just
about sign my name.”
    “The questionnaire we’ll get the nurse to fill out later

, . . for our records.     .  .  . Well, goodby, Mr. Anderson,

I hope you have a very pleasant stay with us and wishing
you a quick recovery.” The stout starched woman had
gone.
   “Hay, nurse,” called Charley. He suddenly felt scared.
“What is this dump anyway Where am P Say, nurse,
nurse.” He shouted as loud as he could. The sweat broke
out all over his face and neck and ran into his ears and
eyes. He could move his head and his arms but the pit
of his stomach was gone. He had no feeling in his legs.
His mouth was dry with thirst.
   A new pretty pink nurse was leaning over him. “What
can I do for you, mister?” She wiped his face and showed
him where the bell was hanging just by his hand. “Nurse,
Pm terribly thirsty,” he said in a weak voice.
    “Now you must just rinse out your mouth. The doctor
doesn’t want you to eat or drink anything until he’s estab-
lished the drainage.”
    “Where is this doctor? . . . Why isn’t he here now? . . .
Why hasn’t he been here right along? If he isn’t careful
I’ll fire him and get another.”
    “Here’s Dr. Snyder right now,” said the nurse in an
awed whisper.
    “Well, Anderson, you surely had a narrow squeak. You
probably thought you were in a plane all the time.        . . .
Funny, I’ve never known an airplane pilot yet who could
drive a car. My name’s Snyder. Dr. Ridgely Snyder of
New York, Dr. Booth the housephysician here has called
me in as a consultant. It’s possible we may have to patch
up your ii.s'^de a little. You see when they picked you up,
as I understand it, a good deal of the car was lying across
your middle ... a very lucky break that it didn’t finish
you right there. - . . You understand me, don’t you?”
         372

1288
    Dr. Snyder was a big man with flat closeshaven cheeks
and square hands ending in square nails. A song old man
Vogel used to sing ran across Charley’s faint mind as he
looked at the doctor standing there big and square and
paunchy in his white clothes he looked like William Kaiser
the butcher but they don’t know each other.
         guess It’s the dope but my mind don’t work very
good. ... You do the best you can, doc .          .  . and don’t
spare any expense. I just fixed up a little deal that’ll make
their ears ring. . .      . Say, doctor, what about that little
girl? Wasn’t there a little girl in the car^*”
    ^^Oh, don’t worry about her. She’s fine. She was thrown
absolutely clear. A slight concussion, a few contusions, she’s
coming along splendidly.”
    “I was scared to ask.”

    ^We’ve got to do a little operating . . . suture of the
intestine, a very interesting problem. Now I don’t want
you to have anything on your mind, Mr. Anderson.       .  .  .

It’ll just be a stitch here and a stitch there      . . . we’ll see
what we can do. This was supposed to be my vacation but
of course I’m always glad to step in in an emergency.”
    ^Well, thank you, doc, for whatever you can do. ... I
guess I ought not to drink so much.    .  .  . Say, why won’t
they let me drink some water?      . .   . It’s funny, when I

first came to in here I thought I was in another of them
clipjoints. Now Dons, she wouldn’ta liked me to talk like

that, you know, bad grammar, conduct unbecoming an
officer and a gentleman. But you know, doc, when you get
so you can buy ’em and sell ’em like an old bag of peanuts,
a bag of stale goobers, you don’t care what they think.
You know, doc, it may be a great thing for me bein’ laid
up, give me a chance to lay off the liquor, think about
things. .   .  . Ever thought about things, doc?”
    ^What I’m thinking right now, Mr. Anderson, is that
I’d like you to be absolutely quiet.”
    “All right, you do your stuff, doc         . ,   . you send that

                                                                                373

1289
pretty nurse in an’ lemme talk to her. I want to talk about
old Bill Cermak. ^ . , He was the only straight guy I ever
kneWj him an’ Joe Askew. ... I wonder how he felt
when he died, ... You see the last time I was, well, call

it constitutionally damaged .    . . him and me smashed up
in a plane ... the new Mosquito           .  .  . there’s millions
in It now but the bastards got the stock away from me. . . *
Say, doc, I don’t suppose you ever died, did you^”’
    There was nothing but the white ceiling above him,
brighter where the light came from the window. Charley
remembered the bell by his hand. He rang and rang it.
Nobody came. Then he yanked at it until he felt the cord
pull out somewhere. The pretty pink nurse’s face bloomed
above him like a closeup m a movie. Her young rarely-
kissed mouth was moving. He could see it making clucking
noises, but a noise like longdistance in his ears kept him
from hearing what she said. It was only when he was talk-
ing he didn’t feel scared. “Look here, young woman ,    .
he could hear himself talking. He was enjoying hearing
himself talking. “I’m payin’ the bills in this hospital and
I’m goin’ to have everythin’ just how I want it. ... I
want you to sit here an’ listen while I talk, see. Let’s see,
what was I tellin’ that bird about? He may be a doctor
but he looks like Wilbam Kaiser the butcher to me. You’re
too young to know that song.”
    “There’s somebody to see you, Mr. Anderson. Would
you like me to freshen your face up a little?”
    Charley turned his eyes. The screen had been pushed
open. In the grey oblong of the door there was Margo.
She was in yellow. She was looking at him with eyes
round as a bird’s,
    “You’re not mad, Margery, are you?”
    “I’m worse than mad, I’m worried.”
    “Everythin’s goin’ to be oke, Margo. I got a swell saw-
bones from New York. He’ll patch me up. He looks like
William Kaiser the butcher all except the mustaches . . .

         374

1290
what do you know about that, I forgot the mustaches, o . .
Don’t look at me funny like that. I’m all right, see. I just
feel better if I talk, see. I bet I’m the talkin’est patient
they ever had in this hospital. . . . Margo, you know 1
mighta gotten to be a rummy if I’d kept on drinkin’ like
that. It’s just as well to be caught up short.”
    ^^Say, Charley, are you well enough to write out a check ^

I’ve got to have some jack. You know you were goin’ to
give me a commission on that airport deal. And I’ve got
to hire a lawyer for you. Eileen’s folks are going to sue.
That county attorney’s sworn out a warrant. I brought
your New York checkbook.”
      Jesus, Margo, I’ve made a certain amount of jack but
I’m not the Bank of England.”
    ^^But, Charley, you said you’d open an account for me.”
    ^^Gimme a chance to get out of the hospital.”
    ^^Charley, you poor unfortunate Mr. A           . you don’t
think it’s any fun for me to worry you at a time like this

, . . but I’ve got to eat like other people ... an’ if I had
some jack I could fix that county attorney up         .  .  . and
keep the stuff out of the papers and everything. You know
the kind of story they’ll make out of it . .          . but I got to
have money quick.”
    ^^All right, make out a check for five thousand. . . .
Damn lucky for you I didn’t break my arm.”
    The pretty pink nurse had come back. Her voice was
cold and sharp and icy. ^T’m afraid it’s time,” she said.
     Margo leaned over and kissed him on the forehead
Charley felt like he was in a glass case. There was the
touch of her lips, the smell of her dress, her hair, the
perfume she used, but he couldn’t feel them. Like a scene
in a movie he watched her walk out, the sway of her hips
under the tight dress, the little nervous way she was flutter-
ing the check under her chin to dry the ink on it.

    ^^Say, nurse, it’s like a run on a bank ... I guess they
 think the old institution’s not so sound as it might be. .  .

                                                                                375

1291
Vm givin’ orders now, see, tell ’em down at the desk, no
more visitors, see? You and me an’ Dr. Kaiser William

there, that’s enough, see.”
    ^^Anyway now it’s time for a little trip across the hall,”

said the pretty pink nurse, in a cheerful voice like it was
a show or a baseballgame they were going to.
   An orderly came in. The room started moving away
from the cot, a grey corridor was moving along, but the
moving made blind spasms of pain rush up through his
legs. He sank into sour puking blackness again. When it
was light again it was very far away. His tongue was dry
in his mouth he was so thirsty. Reddish mist was over
everything. He was talking but way off somewhere. He
could feel the talk coming out of his throat but he couldn’t
hear it. What he heard was the doctor’s voice saying peri-
tonitis like it was the finest party in the world, like you’d
say Merry Christmas. There were other voices. His eyes
were open, there were other voices. He must be delirious.
There was Jim sitting there with a puzzled sour gloomy
look on his face like he used to see him when he was a kid
on Sunday afternoons going over his books.
    ^^That you, Jim? How did you get here?”
    ^We flew,” answered Jim. It was a surprise to Charley
that people could hear him, his voice was so far away.
^^Everything’s all right, Charley     .  .  . you mustn’t exert
yourself in the least way. I’ll attend to everything.”
    “Can you hear me, Jim^^ It’s like a bum longdistance
phone connection.”
    “That’s all right, Charley.       .  .  . We’ll take charge of
everything. You just rest quiet. Say, Charley, just as a
precaution I want to ask you, did you make a will?”
    “Say, was it peritonitis I heard somebody say? That’s
bad, ain’t it?”
    Jim’s face was white and long. “It’s . . . it’s just a little
operation. I thought maybe you’d better give me power of
attorney superseding all others, so that you won’t have
         376

1292
anything on your mmdj see. I have it all made out, and I
have Judge Grey here as a witness and Hedwig’ll come
in a minute. ... Tell me, are you married to this
woman?”
    ^^Me married? Never again. . . , Good old Jim, always
wantin’ people to sign things. Too bad I didn’t break my
arm. Well, what do you think about planes now, Jim? Not
practical yet ... eh? But practical enough to make more
money than you ever made sellm’ tin lizzies. . . . Don’t
get sore, Jim. .   . . Say, Jim, be sure to get plenty of good
doctors . . . I’m pretty sick, do you know it? ... It
makes you so hoarse . . . make ’em let me have some
water to drink, Jim. Don’t do to save on the doctors. . .       .

I want to talk like we used to when, you know, up the Red
River fishin’ when there wasn’t any. We’ll try the fishin’
out here . . . swell fishin’ right outside of Miami here. . . .

I feel like I was passin’ out again. Make that doctor give
me somethin’. That was a shot. Thank you, nurse, made
me feel fine, clears everythin’ up. I tell you, Jim, things
are hummin’ in the air     . . . mail subsidies .      . . airports
... all these new airlines . . . we’ll be the foundin’
fathers on all that.     . . . They thought they had me out
on my ass but I fooled ’em. . . . Jesus, Jim, I wish I
could stop talkin’ and go to sleep. But this passin’ out’s not
like sleep, it’s like a   . . . somethin’ phony.”
    He had to keep on talking but it wasn’t any use. He was
too hoarse. His voice was a faint croak, he was so thirsty.
They couldn’t hear him. He had to make them hear him.
He was too weak. He was dropping spinning being sucked
down into








                                                                                377

1293
                                                      NEWSREEL LXII



                    STARS PORTEND EVIL FOR COOLIDGE

                           Ij you can^t tell the world
                               She^s a good httle girl
                            Then just say nothing at all

        the elder Way had been attempting for several years to

get a certain kind of celery spray on the market. The investi-
gation of the charges that he had been beaten revealed that
Way had been warned to cease writing letters, but it also
brought to light the statement that the leading celery growers
were using a spray containing deadly poison

                                 As long as she^s sorree
                                     She needs sym'pathee

                 MINERS RETAIL HORRORS OF DEATH PIT

        inasmuch as banks are having trouble in Florida at this
time, checks are not going through as fast as they should. To
prevent delay please send us express money order instead of
certified check

               Just like a butterfly that^s caught in the rain
                   Longing for flowers
                   Dreaming of hours
               Back in that sun~ldssed lane

                   TOURISTS ROB GAS STATION

             PROFIT TAKING FAILS TO CHECK STOCK RISE

         the climate breeds optimism and it is hard for pessimism to
wvive the bright sunshine and balmy breezes that blow from
the Gulf and the Atlantic

                          Oh it akrdt gonna rciin no more

     HURRICANE SWEEPS SOUTH FLORIDA
          378

1294
               SOUTH FLORIDA DEVASTATED
                    1000 DEAD, 38,000 DESTITUTE

                         BROADWAY BEAUTY BEATEN

                         Fox he got a bushy tazl
                             Possum^s tail is hare
                         Rabbit got no tail at all
                             But only a tuft o^ hair

                   FLORIDA RELIEF FUND FAR SHORT
                     MARTIAL LAW LOOMS

                           It aiiPt gonna rain no more

       according to the police the group spent Saturday evening
at Hillside Park, a Belleville amusement resort and about mid-
night went to the bungalow. The Bagley girls retired, they
told the police, and when the men entered their room one of
the girls jumped from a window

                   But how in hell km the old folks tell
                       It airdt gonna rain no more?



                                           MARGO DOWLING


    Agnes got off the sleeper dressed from head to foot in
black crape. She had put on weight and her face had a grey
rumpled look Margo hadn^t noticed on it before. Margo
put her head on Agnesis shoulder and burst out crying
right there in the sunny crowded Miami station. They got
into the Buick to go out to the beach. Agnes didn’t even
notice the car or the uniformed chauflFeur or anything.
She took Margo’s hand and they sat looking away from
each other out into the sunny streets full of slowlymoving
people in light clothes. Margo was patting her eyes with
her lace handkerchief. ^^Oughtn’t you to wear black?”

                                                                               379

1295
Agnes said. “Wouldn’t you feel better if you were wearing
black?”
    It wasn^t until the blue Buick drew up at the door of
the bungalow on the beach and Raymond^ the thinfaced
mulatto chauffeur, hopped out smiling respectfully to take
the bags that Agnes began to notice anything. She cried

out, ^^Oh, what a lovely car.”
    Margo showed her through the house and out on the
screened porch under the palms facing the purpleblue sea
and the green water along the shore and the white
breakers. ^^Oh, it’s too lovely,” Agnes said and let heiself
drop into a Gloucester hammock sighing. ^^Oh, Pm so
tired.” Then she began to cry again. Margo went to do her
face at the long mirror in the hall. ^Well,” she said when
she came back looking freshpowdered and rosy, ^^how do
you like the house? Some little shack, isn’t it?”
    “Oh, we won’t be able to stay here now.     .  .  . What’ll
we do now?” Agnes was blubbering. “I know it’s all the
wicked unreality of matter. . . . Oh, if he’d only had
proper thoughts.”
    “Anyway the rent’s paid for another month,” said
Margo.
    “Oh, but the expense,” sobbed Agnes.
    Margo was looking out through the screendoor at a big
black tanker on the horizon. She turned her head and
talked peevishly over her shoulder. “Well, there’s nothing
to keep me from turning over a few options, is there? I
tell you what they are having down here’s a boom. Maybe
we can make some money, I know everybody who is any-
body in this town. You just wait and see, Agnes.”
    Eliza, the black maid, brought in a silver coffeeservice
and cups and a plate of toast on a silver tray covered by
a lace doily. Agnes pushed back her veil, drank some
 coffee in little gulps and began to nibble at a piece of toast.
 “Have some preserves on it,” said Margo, lighting herself
         380

1296
a cigarette.        didn’t think you and Frank believed in
mourning.”
    “I couldn’t help it. It made me feel better. Oh, Margo,
have you ever thought that if it wasn’t for our dreadful
unbelief they might be with us this day.” She dried her
eyes and went back to the coffee and toast. ^When’s the
funeral?”
    “It’s going to be in Minnesota. His folks have taken
charge of everything. They think Pm ratpoison.”
    “Poor Mr. Anderson.    . . . You must be prostrated, you
poor child.”
    “You ought to see ’em. His brother Jim would take
the pennies off a dead man’s eyes. He’s threatening to sue
to get back some securities he claims were Charley’s. Well,
let him sue. Homer Cassidy’s my lawyer and what he says
goes in this town.  . . . Agnes, you’ve got to take off those
widow’s weeds and act human. What would Frank think if
he was here?”
    “He IS here,” Agnes shrieked and went all to pieces and
started sobbing again. “He’s watching over us right now.
I know that^” She dried her eyes and sniffed. “Oh,
Margie, coming down on the train I’d been thinking that
maybe you and Mr. Anderson had been secretly married.
He must have left an enormous estate.”
    “Most of it is tied up. .       . , But Charley was all right,
he fixed me up as we went along.”
    “But just think of it, two such dreadful things happen-
ing in one winter.”
    “Agnes,” said Margo, getting to her feet, “if you talk
like that I’m going to send you right back to New
York. . . . Haven’t I been depressed enough? Your nose

Is all red. It’s awful. . . . Look, you make yourself at
home. I’m going out to attend to some business.” “Oh, I
can’t stay here. I feel too strange,” sobbed Agnes, ^^ell,
you can come along if you take off that dreadful veil.
Hurry up, I’ve got to meet somebody.”

                                                                                381

1297
    She made Agnes fix her hair and put on a white blouse.
The black dress really was quite becoming to her. Margo
made her put on a little makeup. ^^There, dearie. Now
you look lovely she said and kissed her.

    ^Ts this really your car?” sighed Agnes as she sank
back on the seat of the blue Buick sedan.       can’t believe

it.” ^Want to see the registration papers?” said Margo.
^^All right, Raymond, you know where the broker’s office

is.”       sure do, miss,” said Raymond, touching the shiny
visor of his cap as the motor started to hum under the
unscratched paint of the hood.
   At the broker’s office there was the usual welldressed
elderly crowd in sportsclothes filling up the benches, men
with panamahats held on knees of Palm Beach suits and
linen plusfours, women in pinks and greens and light tan
and white crisp dresses. It always affected Margo a little

like church, the whispers, the deferential manners, the
boys quick and attentive at the long blackboards marked
with columns of symbols, the click of the telegraph, the
firm voice reading the quotations off the ticker at a desk
in the back of the room. As they went in Agnes in an awed
voice whispered in Margo’s ear hadn’t she better go and
sit in the car until Margo had finished her business. ^^No,
stick around,” said Margo. ^^You see those boys are chalk-
ing up the stockmarket play by play on those black-
boards. . . I’m just beginning to get on to this business.”
Two elderly gentlemen with white hair and broadflanged
Jewish noses smilingly made room for them on a bench
in the back of the room. Several people turned and stared
at Margo. She heard a woman’s voice hissing something
about Anderson to the man beside her. There was a little
stir of whispering and nudging. Margo felt welldressed
and didn’t care.
    ^Well, ma dear young lady,” Judge Cassidy’s voice
 purred behind her, “buyin’ or sellin’ today?” Margo
 turned her head. There was the glint of a gold tooth in
         382

1298
the smile on the broad red face under the thatch of silvery
hair the same color as the grey linen suit which was crossed
by another glint of gold in the watchchain looped double
across the ample bulge of the judge’s vest. Margo shook
her head. ‘^^Nothing much doing today/’ she said. Judge
Cassidy jerked his head and started for the door. Margo
got up and followed, pulling Agnes after her. When they
got out in the breezy sunshine of the short street that ran
to the bathingbeach, Margo introduced Agnes as her
guardian angel.
         hope you won’t disappoint us today the way you did
yesterday, ma dear young lady,” began Judge Cassidy,
^Terhaps we can induce Mrs. Mandeville . .
    ^^I’m afraid not,” broke in Margo. “You see the poor
darling’s so tired. . . . She’s just gotten in from New
York. ... You see, Agnes dear, we are going to look at
some lots. Raymond will take you home, and lunch is all
ordered for you and everything.   . . . You just take a nice
rest.”
    “Oh, of course I do need a rest,” said Agnes, flushing.
Margo helped her into the Buick that Raymond had just
brought around from the parkingplace, kissed her and
then walked down the block with the judge to where his
Pierce Arrow touringcar stood shiny and glittery in the hot
noon sunlight.
    The judge drove his own car. Margo sat with him In
the ft*ont seat. As soon as he’d started the car she said,
“Weil, what about that check “Why, ma dear young
lady, I’m very much afraid that no funds means no
funds. ... I presume we can recover from the estate.”

^^Just in time to make a first payment on a cemetery lot.”
^Well, those things do take time . .      . the poor boy seems
to have left his affairs in considerable confusion.”
    “Poor guy,” said Margo, looking away through the rows
of palms at the brown reaches of Biscayne Bay. Here and
there on the green islands new stucco construction stuck out

                                                                                383

1299
raw, like stagescenery out on the sidewalk in the daytime.
^^Honestly I did the best I could to straighten him out.”
            course. ... Of course he had very considerable
holdings. ... It was that crazy New York life. Down
here we take things easily, we know how to let the fruit
ripen on the tree.”
    ^^Oranges,” said Margo, ^^and lemons.” She started to
laugh but the judge didn’t join in.
    Neither of them said anything for a while. They’d
reached the end of the causeway and turned past yellow
frame wharfbuildings into the dense traffic of the Miami
waterfront. Everywhere new tall buildings iced like layer-
cake were standing up out of scaffolding and builder’s
rubbish. Rumbling over the temporary wooden bridge
across the Miami River in a roar of concretemixers and a
drive of dust from the construction work, Margo said,
turning a roundeyed pokerface at the judge, “Well, I guess
I’ll have to hock the old sparklers.” The judge laughed
and said, “I can assure you the bank will afford you every
facility. . . . Don’t bother your pretty little head about it.
You hold some very considerable options right now if I’m
not mistaken.” “I don’t suppose you could lend me a couple
of grand to run on on the strength of them, judge.”
    They were running on a broad new concrete road
through dense tropical scrub. “Ma dear young lady,” said
Judge Cassidy in his genial drawl, “I couldn’t do that for
your own sake . .   . think of the false interpretations . . .
the idle gossip. We’re a little oldfashioned down here.
We’re easygom’ but once the breath of scandal . . . Why,
even drivin’ with such a charmin’ passenger through the
streets of Miamah is a folly, a very pleasant folly. But
you must realize, ma dear young lady ... A man in ma
position can’t afford  . .  . Don’t misunderstand ma motive,
ma dear young lady. I never turned down a friend in ma
life. .    .  . But ma position would unfortunately not be
understood that way. Only a husband or a . .

         384

1300
          this a proposal, judge she broke in sharply. Her
eyes were stinging. It was hard keeping back the tears.
    “Just a little advice to a client. . . The judge sighed.
“Unfortunately Pm a family man.”
    “How long IS this boom going to last?”
    “I don’t need to remind you what type of animal is
born every minute.”
    “No need at all,” said Margo gruffly.
    They were driving into the parkinglot behind the great
new caramelcolored hotel. As she got out of the car Margo
said, “Well, I guess some of them can afford to lose their
money but we can’t, can we, judge?” “Ma dear young lady,
there’s no such word in the bright lexicon of youth.” The
judge was ushering her into the diningroom in his fatherly
way. “Ah, there are the boys now.”
    At a round table in the center of the crowded dining-
room sat two fatfaced young men with big mouths wearing
pinkstriped shirts and nilegreen wash neckties and white

suits. They got up still chewing and pumped Margo’s hand
when the judge presented them. They were twins. As they
sat down again one of them winked and shook a fat fore-
finger. “We used to see you at the Palms, girlie, naughty
naughty.”
    “Well, boys,” said the judge, “how’s tricks?” “Couldn’t
be better,” one of them said with his mouth full. “You see,
boys,” said the judge, “this young lady wants to make a
few small investments with a quick turnover.       .  . The
twins grunted and went on chewing.
    After lunch the judge drove them all down to the
Venetian Pool where William Jennings Bryan sitting in an
armchair on the float under a striped awning was talking

to the crowd. From where they were they couldn’t hear
what he was saying, only the laughter and handclapping
 of the crowd in the pauses. “Do you know, judge,” said
 one of the twins, as they worked their way through the
 fringes of the crowd around the pool, “if the old boy

                                                                                3^5

1301
hadn^t wasted his time with politics, he’da made a great
auctioneer.”
    Margo began to feel tired and wilted. She followed the
twins into the realestateofEce full of perspiring men in
shirtsleeves. The judge got her a chair. She sat there tap-
ping with her white kid foot on the tiled floor with her
lap full of blueprints. The prices were all so high. She felt
out of her depth and missed Mr. A to buy for her, he^d
have known what to buy sure. Outside, the benches on the
lawn were crowded. Bawling voices came from everywhere.
The auction was beginning. The twins on the stand were
Waving their arms and banging with their hammers. The
judge was striding around behind Margots chair talking
boom to anybody who would listen. When he paused for
breath she looked up at him and said, Judge Cassidy,
could you get me a taxi?” “Ma dear young lady, Pll drive
you home myself. Itfll be a pleasure.” ^^O.K.,” said Margo.
‘Tou are very wise,” whispered Judge Cassidy in her ear.
   As they were walking along the edge of the crowd one
of the twins they^d had lunch with left the auctioneer’s
stand and dove through the crowd after them. ^‘^Miss
Dowlin’,” he said, ^^kin me an’ A1 come to calP” ^^Sure,”
said Margo, smiling. ^^Name’s in the phonebook under
Dowling.” ^We’ll be around,” And he ran back to the
stand where his brother was pounding with his hammer.
She’d been afraid she hadn’t made a hit with the twins.
Now she felt the tired lines smoothing out of her face.
    ^Well, what do you think of the great development of
Coral Gables?” said the judge as he helped her into the
car. ^‘^Somebody must be making money,” said Margo
dryly.
    Once in the house she pulled off her hat and told Ray-
mond, who acted as butler in the afternoons, to make some
martini cocktails, found the judge a cigar and then excused
herself for a moment. Upstairs she found Agnes sitting in
her toom in a lavender negligee manicuring her nails at
         38^

1302
the dressingtabie. Without saying a word Margo dropped
on the bed and began to cry. Agnes got up looking big
and flabby and gentle and came over to the bed. “Why,
Margie, you never cry.     . .       “I know I don^t,” sobbed
Margo, “but ids all so awful.      ,  .  . Judge Cassidy’s down
there, you go and talk to him.         .  . “Poor little girl.
Surely I will but it’s you he’ll be v/anting to see. . .               ,
You’ve been through too much.” “I won’t go back to the
chorus ... I won’t,” Margo sobbed. “Oh, no, I wouldn’t
like that.   .  . . But I’ll go down now. ... I feel really
rested for the first time in months,” said Agnes.
    When Margo was alone she stopped bawling at once.
“Why, I’m as bad as Agnes,” she muttered to herself as
she got to her feet. She turned on the water for a bath.
It was late by the time she’d gotten into an afternoondress
and come downstairs. The judge looked pretty glum. He
sat puffing at the butt of a cigar and sipping at a cocktail
while Agnes talked to him about Faith.
    He perked up when he saw Margo coming down the
stairs. She put some dancemusic on the phonograph.
^When I’m in your house I’m like that famed Grecian
sage in the house of the sirens ... I forget hometies,
engagements, everything,” said the judge, coming toward
her onestepping. They danced. Agnes went upstairs again.
Margo could see that the judge was just on the edge of
making a pass at her. She was wondering what to do about

it when Cliff Wegman was suddenly ushered into the room.
The judge gave the young man a scared suspicious look.
Margo could see he thought he was going to be framed.
    “Why, Mr. Wegman, I didn’t know you were in
Miami.” She took the needle off the record and stopped
the phonograph. “Judge Cassidy, meet Mr. Wegman.”
^^Glad to meet you, judge. Mr. Anderson used to talk
about you. I was his personal secretary.” Cliff looked hag^
gard and nervous. “I just pulled into this little old town,”
he said. “I hope I’m not intruding,” He grinned at Margo.

                                                                                387

1303
'“'Well, Pm woiking for the Charles Anderson estate now.’’
    “Poor fellow,” said Judge Cassidy, getting to his feet.
“I had the honor of bein^ quite a friend of Lieutenant
Anderson’s. .  .       Shaking his head he walked across the
soft plumcolored carpet to Margo. “Well, ma dear young
lady, you must excuse me. But duty calls. This was indeed
delightful.” Margo went out with him to his car. The
rosy evening was fading into dusk. A mockingbird was
singing in a peppertree beside the house. “When can I
bring the jewelry?” Margo said, leaning towards the judge
over the front seat of the car. “Perhaps you better come
to my of&ce tomorrow noon. We’ll go over to the bank
together. Of course the appraisal will have to be at the
expense of the borrower.” “O.K. and by that time I hope
you’ll have thought of some way I can turn it over quick.
What’s the use of having a boom if you don’t take advan-
tage of it?” The judge leaned over to kiss her. His wet lips
brushed against her ear as she pulled her head away. “Be
yourself, judge,” she said.
    In the livmgroom Cliff was striding up and down fit to
be tied. He stopped in his tracks and came towards her
with his fists clenched as if he were going to hit her. He
was chewing gumj the thin jaw moving from side to side
gave him a face like a sheep. “Well, the boss soitenly
done right by little Orphan Annie.”
    “Well, if that’s all you came down here to tell me you
can just get on the train and go back home.”
    “Look here, Margo, I’ve come on business.”
    “On business?” Margo let herself drop into a pink over-
staffed chair. “Sit down, Cliff . .      . but you didn’t need to
come barging m here like a process server. Is it about
Charley’s estate?”
    “Estate hell ... I want you to marry me. The pickm’s
are slim right now but I’ve got a big career ahead.”
    Margo let out a shriek and let her head drop on the back
of the chair. She got to laug*bmg and couldn’t stop laugh-
         388

1304
ing. “No, honestly, Cliff she spluttered. “But I don’t
want to marry anybody just now. .        .  . Why, Cliff, you
sweet kid. I could kiss you.” He came over and tried to
hug her. She got to her feet and pushed him away. “Pm
not going to let things like that interfere with my career
either.”
    Cliff frowned. “I won’t marry an actress.         .  . . You’d
have to can that stuff.”
    Margo got to laughing again. “Not even a moving-
picture actress?^”
    “Aw, hell, all you do is kid and I’m nuts about you.”
He sat down on the davenport and wrung his head between
his hands. She moved over and sat down beside him. “For-
get it. Cliff.”
    Cliff jumped up again. “I can tell you one thing, you
won’t get anywheres fooling around with that old buzzard
Cassidy. He’s a married man and so crooked he has to go
through a door edgeways. He gypped hell out of the boss
in that airport deal. Hell.       . .   . That’s probably no news
to you. You probably were in on it and got your cut first
thing. .    .  . And then you think it’s a whale of a joke when
a guy comes all the way down to the jumpingoff place to
offer you the protection of his name. All right, I’m
through. Good    .  . . night.” He went out slamming the
glass doors into the hall so hard that a pane of glass broke
and tinkled down to the floor.
    Agnes tushed in from the diningroom. “Oh, how dread-
ful,” she said. “I was listening. I thought maybe poor Mr.
Anderson had left a trustfund for you.” “That boy’s got
bats in his belfry,” said Margo. A minute later the phone
rang. It was Cliff with tears in his voice, apologizing, ask-
ing if he couldn’t come back to talk it over. “Not on your
tintype,” said Margo and hung up. “Well, Agnes,” said
Margo as she came from the telephone, “that’s that.     .  .  .
We’ve got to figure these things out.         .  .  . Cliff’s right
about that old fool Cassidy. He never was in the picture

                                                                                389

1305
anyways.’^ ^^Such a dignified man,” said Agnes, making
clucking noises with her tongue.
   Raymond announced dinner. Margo and Agnes ate
alone, each at one end of the long mahogany table covered
with doilies and silverware. The soup was cold and too

salty. “Tve told that damn girl a hundred times not to
do anything to the soup but take it out of the can and
heat it,” Margo said peevishly. ^^Oh, Agnes, please do the
housekeeping ... I can’t get ’em to do anything right.”
^^Oh, I’d love to,” said Agnes. “Of course I’ve never kept
house on a scale like this.” “We’re not going to either,”

said Margo. “We’ve got to cut down.”
    “I guess I’d better write Miss Franklyn to see if she’s
got another job for me.”
    “You just wait a little while,” said Margo. “We can stay
on here for a couple months. I’ve got an idea it would do
Tony good down here. Suppose we send him his ticket to
come down? Do you think he’d sell it on me and hit the
dope again “But he’s cured. He told me himself he’d
straightened out completely.” Agnes began to blubber over
her plate. “Oh, Margo, what an openhanded girl you
               just like your
are .  .  .                        poor mother . . . always thinking
of others.”
    When Tony got to Miami he looked pale as a mealy-
worm but lying on the beach in the sun and dips in the
breakers soon got him into fine shape. He was good as gold
and seemed very grateful and helped Agnes with the
                                                               Agnes declared she
housework, as they’d let the maids go 5
couldn’t do anything with them and would rather do the
work herself. When men Margo knew came around she
introduced him as a Cuban relative. But he and Agnes
mostly kept out of sight when she had company. Tony
was tickled to death when Margo suggested he learn to
drive the car. He drove fine right away, so they could let
Raymond go. One day when he was getting ready to drive
her over to meet some big realtors at Cocoanut Grove,
         390

1306
Margo suggested, just as a joke, that Tony try to see if
Raymond's old uniform wouIdn^t fit him. He looked fine
in it. When she suggested he wear it when he drove her
he went into a tantrum, and talked about honor and man-
hood. She cooled him down saying that the whole thing
was a joke and he said, well, if it was a joke, and wore it.
Margo could tell he kinder liked the uniform because she
saw him looking at himself in it in the pierglass in the hall.
    Miami realestate was on the skids, but Margo managed
to make a hundred thousand dollars’ profit on the, options
                 on paper. The trouble was that she couldn’t get
she held 5
any cash out of her profits.
    The twins she’d met at Coral Gables gave her plenty of
advice but she was leery, and advice was all they did give
her. They were always around m the evenings and Sun-
days, eating up everything Agnes had in the icebox and
drinking all the liquor and talking big about the good
things they were going to put youall onto. Agnes said she
never shook the sand out of her beachslippers without
expecting to find one of the twins in it. And they never
came across with any parties either, didn’t even bring
around a bottle of scotch once in a while. Agnes was kinder
soft on them because A1 made a fuss over her while Ed
was trying to make Margo. One Sunday when they’d all
been lying in the sun on the beach and sopping up cock-

tails all afternoon Ed broke into Margo’s room when she
was dressing after they’d come in to change out of their
bathingsuits and started tearing her wrapper off her. She
gave him a poke but he was drunk as a fool and came at her
worse than ever. She had to yell for Tony to come in and
play the heavy husband. Tony was white as a sheet and
trembled all over, but he managed to pick up a chair and
was going to crown Ed with it when A1 and Agnes came in
to see what the racket was about. A1 stuck by Ed and gave
Tony a poke and yelled that he was a pimp and that they
were a couple of goddam whores. Margo was scared. They

                                                                                391

1307
never would have got them out of the house if Agnes
hadn’t gone to the phone and threatened to call the police.
The twins said nothing doing, the police were there to run
women like them out of town, but they got into their
clothes and left and that was the last Margo saw of them.
   After they’d gone Tony had a crying fit and said that
he wasn’t a pimp and that thisiife was impossible and that
he’d kill himself if she didn’t give him money to go back

to Havana. To get Tony to stay they had to promise to
get out of Miami as soon as they could. ^^Now, Tony, you
know you want to go to California,” Agnes kept saying
and petting him like a baby. ^^Sandflies are getting too bad
on the beach anyway,” said Margo. She went down in the
livmgroom and shook up another cocktail for them all.
^^The bottom’s dropped out of this dump. Time to pull
out,” she said. ^T’m through.”
    It was a sizzling hot day when they piled the things in
the Buick and drove off up U.S. i with Tony, not in his
uniform but in a new waspwaisted w^hite linen suit, at the
wheel. The Buick was so piled with bags and household
junk there was hardly ;oom for Agnes m the back seat.
Tony’s guitar was slung from the ceiling. Margo’s ward-
robetrunk was strapped on behind. “My goodness,” said
Agnes when she came back from the restroom of the fill-
ingstation in West Palm Beach where they’d stopped for
gas, “we look like a traveJing tentshow.”
    Between them they had about a hundred dollars in cash
that Margo had turned over to Agnes to keep in her black
handbag. The first day Tony would talk about nothing but
the hit he’d make in the movies. “If Valentino can do it,

it will be easy for me,” he’d say, craning his neck to see his
clear brown profile in the narrow drivingmirror at the top
 of the windshield.
    At night they stopped in touristcamps, all sleeping in
 one cabin to save money, and ate out of cans. Agnes loved

 it. She said it was like the old days when they were on the

         392

1308
Keith circuit and Margo was a child actress. Margo said
child actress hell, it made her feel like an old crone.
Towards afternoon Tony would complain of shooting pains
in his wrists and Margo would have to drive.
   Along the gulf coast of Alabama, Mississippi and Louisi-
ana the roads were terrible. It was a relief when they got
into Texas, though the weather there was showery. They
thought they never would get across the state of Texas,
though. Agnes said she didn’t know there was so much
alfalfa in the world. In El Paso they had to buy two new
tires and get the brakes fixed. Agnes began to look worried
when she counted over the roll of bills in her purse. The
last couple of days across the desert to Yuma they had
nothing to eat but one can of baked beans and a bunch of
frankfurters. It was frightfully hot but Agnes wouldn’t
even let them get Coca-Cola at the dustylooking drugstores
in the farbetween little towns because she said they had to
save every cent if they weren’t going to hit Los Angeles
deadbroke. As they were wallowing along in the dust of
the unfinished highway outside of Yuma, a shmylookmg
S. P. expresstrain passed them, big new highshouldered
locomotive, pullmancars, diner, clubcar with girls and men
in light suits lolling around on the observation platform.
The train passed slowly and the colored porters leaning
out from the pullmans grinned and waved. Margo remem-
bered her trips to Florida in a drawingroom and sighed.
“Don’t worry, Margie,” chanted Agnes from the back seat.
“We’re almost there.” “But where? Where? That’s what
I want to know,” said Margo, with tears starting into her
eyes. The car went over a bump that almost broke the
springs. “Never mind,” said Tony, “when I make the ori-
entations I shall be making thousands a week and we shall
travel m a private car.”
    In Yuma they had to stop m the hotel because the camps
were all full and that set them- back plenty. They were all

in, the three of them, and Margo woke up in the night

                                                                                393

1309
in a high fever from the heat and dust and fatigue. In
the morning the fever was gone, but her eyes were puffed
up and red and she looked a sight. Her hair needed wash-
ing and was stringy and dry as a handful of tow.
    The next day they were too tired to enjoy it when they
went across the high fragrant mountains and came out into
i-he San Bernardino valley full of wellkept fruittrees,
orangegroves that still had a few flowers on them, and
coolsmelling irrigation ditches. In San Bernardino Margo
said she’d have to have her hair washed if it was the last
thing she did on this earth. They still had twentyfive
dollars that Agnes had saved out of the housekeeping
money in Miami, that she hadn’t said anything about.
While Margo and Agnes went to a beautyparlor, they
gave Tony a couple of dollars to go around and get the
car washed. That night they had a regular fiftycent dinner
in a restaurant and went to a movingpicture show. They
slept in a nice roomy cabin on the road to Pasadena in 3
camp the woman at the beautyparlor had told them about,
and the next morning they set out early before the white
clammy fog had lifted.
   The road was good and went between miles and miles
of orangegroves. By the time they got to Pasadena the sun
had come out and Agnes and Margo declared it was the
loveliest place they’d ever seen in their lives. Whenever
they passed a particularly beautiful residence Tony would
point at it with his finger and say that was where they’d
live as soon as he had made the orientations.
   They saw signs pointing to Hollywood, but somehow
they got through the town without noticing it, and drew
up in front of a small rentingoffice in Santa Monica. All
the furnished bungalows the man had listed were too
expensive and the man insisted on a month’s rent in ad-
vance, so they drove on. They ended up in a dusty stucco
bungalow court in the outskirts of Venice where the man
seemed impressed by the blue Buick and the wardrobe-
        394

1310
trunk and let them take a place with only a week paid ift
advance. Margo thought it was horrid but Agnes was in
the highest spirits. She said Venice reminded her of Hol-
land’s in the old days. “That’s what gives me the sick,”
said Margo. Tony went in and collapsed on the couch and
Margo had to get the neighbors to help carry in the bags
and wardrobetrunk. They lived in that bungalow court for
more months than Margo ever liked to admit even at the
time.
    Margo registered at the agency as Margo de Garrido.
She got taken on in society scenes as extra right away on
account of her good clothes and a kind of a way of wearing
them she had that she’d picked up at old Piquot’s. Tony
sat in the agency and loafed around outside the gate of any
studio where there was a Spanish or South American pic-
ture being cast, wearing a broadbrimmed Cordoba hat he’d
bought at a costumer’s and tightwaisted trousers and some-
times cowboy boots and spurs, but the one thing there
always seemed to be enough of was Latin types. He turned
morose and peevish and took to driving the car around
filled up with simpering young men he’d picked up, until
Margo put her foot down and said it was her car and
nobody else’s, and not to bring his fagots around the house
either. He got sore at that and walked out, but Agnes, who
did the housekeeping and handled all the money Margo
brought home, wouldn’t let him have any pocketmoney
until he’d apologized. Tony was away two days and came
back looking hungry and hangdog.
    After that Margo made him wear the old chauffeur’s
uniform when he drove her to the lot. She knew that if he
wore that he wouldn’t go anywhere after he’d left her
except right home to change and then Agnes could take the
car key. Margo would come home tired from a long day
on the lot to find that he’d been hanging round the house
all day strumming It Ain’t Gonna Ram No More on his
guitar, and sleeping and yawning on all the beds and

                                                                                395

1311
dropping cigaretteashes everywhere. He said Margo had
ruined his career. What she hated most about him was the
way he yawned.
    One Sunday, after they had been three years in the out-
skirts of L. A., moving from one bungalow to another,
Margo getting on the lots fairly consistently as an extra,
but never getting noticed by a director, managing to put
aside a little money to pay the interest but never getting
together enough in a lump sum to bail out her jewelry at
the bank in Miami, they had driven up to Altadena in the
                  on the way back they stopped at a garage to
afternoon j
                         out in front of the garage there were some
get a flat fixed 3
secondhand cars for sale. Margo walked up and down look-
ing at them to have something to do while they were
waiting. ^^You wouldn’t like a Rolls-Royce, would you,
lady?” said the garage attendant kind of kidding as he
pulled the jack out from under the car. Margo climbed
into the big black limousine with a red coatofarms on the
door and tried the seat. It certainly was comfortable. She
leaned out and said, ^^How much is it?” ^^One thousand
dollars .   .  . it’s a gift at the price.” “Cheap at half the
price,” said Margo. Agnes had gotten out of the Buick and
come over. “Are you crazy, Margie?”
    “Maybe,” said Margo and asked how much they’d allow
her if she traded in the Buick. The attendant called the
boss, a toadfaced young man with a monogram on his silk

shirt. He and Margo argued back and forth for an hour
about the price. Tony tried driving the car and said it ran
 like a dream. He was all pepped up at the idea of driv-
 ing a Rolls, even an old one. In the end the man took
 the Buick and five hundred dollars in tendollar weekly
 payments. They signed the contract then and there, Margo
gave Judge Cassidy’s and Tad Whittlesea’s names as ref-
                they changed the plates and drove home that
 erences j
 night in the Rolls-Royce to Santa Monica where they were
 living at the time. As they turned into Santa Monica

         396

1312
Boulevard at Beverly Hills, Margo said carelessly, ^^Tony,
isn’t that mailed hand holding a sword very much like the
coatofarms of the Counts de Garndo?” “These people
out here are so ignorant they wouldn’t know the differ-
ence,” said Tony. “We’ll just leave it there,” said Margo.
“Sure,” said Tony, “it looks good.”
   The other extras surely stared when Tony in his trim
grey uniform drove her down to the lot next day, but
Margo kept her pokerface. “It’s just the old family bus,’*''
she said when a girl asked her about it. “It’s been in hock.’‘^
“Is that your mother?” the girl asked again, pointing with
her thumb at Agnes who was driving away sitting up
dressed in her best black in the back of the huge shin)
car with her nose in the air. “Oh, no,” said Margo coldly
“That’s my companion.”
   Plenty of men tried to date Margo up, but they were
mostly extras or cameramen or propertymen or carpenters
and she and Agnes didn’t see that it would do her any
good to mix up with them. It was a lonely life after all the
friends and the guys crazy about her and the business deals
and everything in Miami. Most nights she and Agnes just
played Russian bank or threehanded bridge if Tony was
in and not too illtempered to accommodate. Sometimes
they went to the movies or to the beach if it was warm
enough. They drove out through the crowds on Holly-
wood Boulevard nights when there was an opening at
Grauman’s Chinese Theater. The Rolls looked so fancy
and Margo still had a good eveningdress not too far out
of style so that everybody thought they were filmstars.
    One dusty Saturday afternoon in midwinter Margo was
feeling particularly desperate because styles had changed
so she couldn’t wear her old dresses any more and didn’t
have any money for newj she jumped up from her seat
knocking the pack of solitaire cards onto the floor and
shouted to Agnes that she had to have a little blowout or
she’d go crazy. Agnes said why didn’t they drive to Palm

                                                                                397

1313
Springs to see the new resort hotel. They’d eat dinner
there if it wouldn’t set them back too much and then spend
the night at a touristcamp down near the Salton Sea. Give
them a chance to get the chill of the Los Angeles fog out
of their bones.
   When they got to Palm Springs Agnes thought every-
thing looked too expensive and wanted to drive right on,
but Margo felt in her element right away. Tony was m his
uniform and had to wait for them in the car. He looked
so black in the face Margo thought he’d burst when she
told him to go and get himself some supper at a dog-
wagon, but he didn’t dare answer back because the doorman
was right there.
   They’d been to the ladies’ room to freshen their faces
up and were walking up and down under the big date-
palms looking at the people to see if they could recognize
any movie actors, when Margo heard a voice that was
familiar. A dark thinfaced man in white serge who was
chatting with an importantlooking baldheaded Jewish gen-
tleman was staring at her. He left his friend and came up.
He had a stiff walk like an officer reviewing a company
drawn up at attention. ^^Miss Dowling,” he said, ^ffiow
very lucky for both of us.” Margo looked smiling into
the twitching sallow face with dark puffs under the eyes.
“You’re the photographer,” she said.
    He stared at her hard. “Sam Margolies,” he said.
“Well, I’ve searched all over America and Europe for
you. .  . Please be in my office for a screentest at ten
o’clock tomorrow. .    . . Irwin will give you the details,”
He waved his hand lackadaisically towards the fat man.
“Meet Mr. Harris . . . Miss Dowling            .  . . forgive me,
I never take upon myself the responsibility of introducing
people. . . . But I want Irwin to see you . . . this is one
of the most beautiful women in America, Irwin.” He
drew his hand down in front of Margo a couple of inches
from her face working the fingers as if he were modeling

         398

1314
something out of clay, ^^Ordinarily it would be impossibli
to photograph her. Only I can put that tace on th<i
screen. .  . Margo felt cold all up her spine. She heard
Agnes’s mouth come open with a gasp behind her. She
let a slow kidding smile start m the corners of her mouth.
^‘^Look, Irwin,” cried Margolies, grabbing the fat man by
the shoulder. “It is the spirit of comedy.         . . . But why
didn’t you come to see me?” He spoke with a strong for-
eign accent of some kind. “What have I done that you
should neglect me?”
    Margo looked bored. “This is Mrs. Mandeville, my . . „
companion. .  . . We are taking a little look at California.”
    “What’s there here except the studios?”
    “Perhaps you’d show Mrs. Mandeville around a mov-^
ingpicture studio. She’s so anxious to see one, and I don’t
know a soul in this part of the world . .        . not a soul.”
    “Of course I’ll have someone take you to all you care
to see tomorrow. Nothing to see but dullness and vulgar-

ity.   .  .  . Irwin, that’s the face I’ve been looking for for
the little blonde girl .       .  . you remember. ... You talk
to me of agencies, extras, nonsense, I don’t want actors. . . .
But, Miss Dowling, where have you been? I halfexpected
to meet you at Baden-Baden last summer. ... You are
the type for Baden-Baden. It’s a ridiculous place but one
has to go somewhere. . . . Where have you been?”
    “Florida . .      . Havana . . . that sort of thing.” Margo
was thinking to herself that the last time she met him he
hadn’t been using the broad a.
    “And you’ve given up the stage?”
    Margo gave a little shrug. “The family were so horrid
about it.” “Oh, I never liked her being on the stage,” cried
Agnes who’d been waiting for a chance to put a word in.
“You’ll like working in pictures,” said the fat man sooth-

ingly. “My dear Margo,” said Margolies, “it is not a very
 large part but you are perfect for it, perfect. I can bring
 put in you the latent mystery. . . . Didn’t I tell yott^j

                                                                                399

1315
Irwin, that the thing to do was to go out of the studio and
Bee the world . .    . open the book of life? ... In this
ridiculous caravanserai we find the face, the spirit of
comedy, the smile of the Mona Lisa.  .  .  . That’s a famous
painting in Paris said to be worth five million dollars. .     . .
Don’t ask me how I knew she would be here.    . .   . But I
knew. Of course we cannot tell definitely until after the
Bcreentest ... I never commit myself. . .

    ^^But, Mr. Margolies, I don’t know if I can do it,”
Margo said, her heart pounding. “We’re in a rush.         . . .
We have important business to attend to in Miami        . . .
family matters, you understand.”
    “That’s of no importance. I’ll find you an agent .           . .

we’ll send somebody. .  . . Petty details are of no impor-
tance to me. Realestate, I suppose.”
    Margo nodded vaguely.
    “A couple of years ago the house where we’d been liv-
ing, it was so lovely, was washed clear out to sea,” said
Agnes breathlessly.
    “You’ll get a better house . .      . Malibu Beach, Beverly
Hills. ... I hate houses.          . . . But I have been rude, I
have detained you. .   .  . But you will forget Miami. We
have everything out here. ... You remember, Margo
dearest, I told you that day that pictures had a great
future . . . you and . . . you know, the great automo-
bile magnate, I have forgotten his name ... I told you
you would hear of me in the pictures. ... I rarely make
predictions, but I am never wrong. They are based on
belief in a sixth sense.”
    “Oh, yes,” interrupted Agnes, “it’s so true, if you believe
you’re going to succeed you can’t fail, that’s what I tell
 Margie. . .
    “Very beautifully said, dear lady. , .        . Miss Dowling
 darling. Continental Attractions at ten.         .  . . I’ll have
 somebody stationed at the gate so that they’ll let your
 chauffeur drive right to my office. It is impossible to reach
         400

1316
me by phone. Even Irwin can’i get at me when I am work-
ing on a picture. It will be an experience for you to see
me at work.”
   “Well, if I can manage it and my chauffeur can find the
way.”
    “You’ll come,” said Margolies and dragged Irwin
Harris away by one short white flannel arm into the dining-
room. Welldressed people stared after them as they went.
Then they were staring at Margo and Agnes. “Let’s go
to the dogwagon and tell Tony. They’ll just think we are
eccentric,” whispered Margo in Agnes’s ear. “I declare I
never imagined the Margolies was him.”
    “Oh, isn’t it wonderful,” said Agnes.
    They were so excited they couldn’t eat. They drove
back to Santa Monica that night and Margo went straight
to bed so as to be rested for the next morning.
    Next morning when they got to the lot at a quarter
of ten Mr. Margolies hadn’t sent word. Nobody had
heard of an appointment. They waited 'half an hour.
Agnes was having trouble keeping back the tears. Margo
was laughing. “I bet that bozo was full of hop or some-
thing and forgot all about it.” But she felt sick inside. Tony
had just started the motor and was about to pull away
because Margo didn’t like being seen waiting at the gate

like that when a white Pierce Arrow custombuilt towncar
with Margolies all in white flannel with a white beret sit-

ting alone in the back drove up alongside. He was peering
into the Rolls-Royce and she could see him start with
surprise when he recognized her. He tapped on the window
of his car with a porcelainheaded cane. Then he got out
of his car and reached in and took Margo by the hand.
“I never apologize. ... It is often necessary for me to
keep people waiting. You will come with me. Perhaps your
friend will call for you at five o’clock. ... I have much
to tell you and to show you.”
    They went upstairs in the elevator in a long plainfaced

                                                                                401

1317
building. He ushered her through several olSces where
young men m their shirtsleeves were working at drafting-

boards, stenographers were typing, actors were waiting on
benches. “Frieda, a screentest for Miss Dowling right
away, please,” he said as he passed a secretary at a big desk
in the last room. Then he ushered her into his own office
hung with Chinese paintings and a single big carved gothic
chair set in the glare of a babyspot opposite a huge carved
gothic desk. “Sit there, please.   .  .  . Margo darling, how
can I explain to you the pleasure of a face unsmirched by
the camera.? I can see that there is no strain. . .   . You do
not care. Celtic freshness combined with insouciance of
noble Spain. ... I can see that you’ve never been before
a camera before. . . . Excuse me.” He sank in the deep
chair behind his desk and started telephoning. Every now
and then a stenographer came and took notes that he
recited to her in a low voice. Margo sat and sat. She
thought Margolies had forgotten her. The room was warm
and stuffy and began to make her feel sleepy. She was
fighting to keep her eyes open when Margolies jumped
up from his desk and said, “Come, darling, we’ll go down
now.”
    Margo stood around for a while in front of some cam-
eras in a plasterysmelling room in the basement and then
Margolies took her to lunch at the crowded restaurant on
the lot. She could feel that everybody was looking up from
their plates to see who the new girl was that Margolies
was taking to lunch. While they ate he asked her ques-
 tions about her life on a great sugarplantation in Cuba,
 and her debutante girlhood in New York. Then he talkeci
about Carlsbad and Baden-Baden and Marienbad and how
 Southern California was getting over its early ridiculous
 vulgarity: “We have everything here that you can find
 anywhere,” he said.
     After lunch they went to see the rushes in the projection-
 room. Mr. Harris turned up too, smoking a cigar. Nobody
          402

1318
said anything as they looked at Margo’s big grey and white
face, grinning, turning, smirking, mouth opening and clos-
ing, head tossing, eyes rolling. It made Margo feel quite
sick looking at it, though she loved still photographs of
herself. She couldn’t get used to its being so big. Now and
then Mr. Harris would grunt and the end of his cigar
would glow red. Margo felt relieved when the film was
over and they were in the dark again. Then the lights were
on and they were filing out of the projectionroom past a
redfaced operator in shirtsleeves who had thrown open the
door to the little black box where the machine was and
gave Margo a look as she passed. Margo couldn’t make
out whether he thought she was good or not.
    On the landing of the outside staircase Margolies put
out his hand coldly and said, ^^Goodby, dearest Margo. . . .
There are a hundred people waiting for me.” Margo
thought It was all off. Then he went on, ‘^You and Irwin
will make the business arrangements ... I have no un-
derstanding of those matters. . .    . I’m sure you’ll have a
very pleasant afternoon.”
    He turned back into the projectionroom swinging his
cane as he went. Mr. Harris explained that Mr. Margolies
would let her know when he wanted her and that mean-
while they would work out the contract. Did she have
an agent? If she didn’t he would recommend that they call
m his friend Mr. Hardbein to protect her interests.
    When she got into the office with Mr. Harris sitting
across the desk from her and Mr. Hardbein, a hollow-
 faced man with a tough kidding manner, sitting beside her,
 she found herself reading a threeyear contract at three
 hundred a week. ^^Oh, dear,” she said, ^T’m afraid I’d be
 awfully tired of it after that length of time.        .  .  . Do you
 mind if I ask my companion Mrs. Mandeville to come
 around?  .  . . I’m so ignorant about these things.” Then
 she called up Agnes and they fiddled around talking about
 the weather until Agnes got there.

                                                                                 403

1319
    Agnes was wonderful. She talked about commitments
and important business to be transacted and an estate to
care for, and said that at that figure it would not be worth
Miss Dowlmg^s while to give up her world cruise, would

it, darling, if she appeared in the picture anyway it was
only to accommodate an old friend Mr. Margolies and of
course Miss Dowling had always made sacrifices for her
work, and that she herself made sacrifices for it and if
necessary would work her fingers to the bone to give her
a chance to have the kind of success she believed in and
that she knew she would have because if you believed with
an unsullied heart God would bring things about the way
they ought to be. Agnes went on to talk about how awful
unbelief was and at five o^clock just as the ofiice was closing
they went out to the car with a contract for three months
at five hundred a week in Agnesis handbag. “I hope the
stores are still open,^^ Margo was saying. ^^Pve got to have
some clothes.^^
    A toughlooking greyfaced man in ridingclothes with
light tow hair was sitting in the front seat beside Tony.
Margo and Agnes glared at the flat oack of his head as
they got into the car. “Take us down to Tasker and Hard-
ing’s on Hollywood Boulevard ... the Pans Gown
Shop,” Agnes said. “Oh, goody, it’ll be lovely to have
you have some new clothes,” she whispered in Margo’s ear.
    When Tony let the stranger off at the corner of Holly-
wood arid Sunset, he bowed stiffly and started off up the
broad sidewalk. “Tony, I don’t know how many times I’ve
told you you couldn’t pick up your friends in my car,”
began Margo. She and Agnes nagged at him so that when
he got home he was in a passion and said that he was
moving out next day. “You have done nothing but exploit
me and interfere with my career. That was Max Hirsch.
He’s an Austrian count and a famous poloplayer.” Next
day sure enough Tony packed his things and left the house.
    The five hundred a week didn’t go as far as Agnes and
         40A

1320
Margo thought ii would. Mr. Hardbein the agent took
ten percent of it first things then Agnes insisted on deposit-
ing fifty to pay off the loan in Miami so that Margo could
get her jewelry back. Then moving into a new house in the
nice part of Santa Monica cost a lot. There was a cook anG"
a housemaid^s wages to pay and they had to have a chauf
feur now that Tony had gone. And there were clothes
and a publicityman and all kinds of charities and handouts
around the studio that you couldn’t refuse. Agnes was won-
derful. She attended to everything. Whenever any busi-
ness matter came up Margo would press her fingers to the
two sides of her forehead and let her eyes close for a
minute and groan. ^Tt’s too bad but I just haven’t got a
head for business.”
    It was Agnes who picked out the new house, a Puerto
Rican cottage with the cutest balconies, jampacked with
antique Spanish furniture. In the evening Margo sat in
an easychair in the big livingroom in front of an open
fire playing Russian bank with Agnes. They got a few
invitations from actors and people Margo met on the lot,
but Margo said she wasn’t going out until she found out
what was what in this town. ^Tirst thing you know we’ll
be going around with a bunch of bums who’ll do us more
harm than good.” ^^How true that is,” sighed Agnes.
^^Like those awful twms in Miami.”
    They didn’t see anything of Tony until, one Sunday
night that Sam Margolies was coming to the house for the

first time, he turned up drimk at about six o’clock and
said that he and Max Hirsch wanted to start a polo school
and that he had to have a thousand dollars right away.
^^But, Tony,” said Agnes, ^Vhere’s Margie going to get

it? ... You know just as well as I do how heavy our
expenses are.” Tony made a big scene, stormed and cried
and said Agnes and Margo had ruined ins slage career
and that now they were out to ruin his career in pictures.

                                                                                405

1321
     have been too patient,” he yelled, tapping himself on

tthe chest. have let myself be ruined by women.”
    Margo kept looking at the clock on the mantel. It was
nearly seven. She finally shelled out twentyfive bucks and
told him to come back during the week. ^^He’s hitting the
hop again,” she said after he^d gone. ^^Hedl go crazy one
of these days.” ^^Poor boy,” sighed Agnes, ^^he’s not a bad
boy, only weak.”
    ^What Pm scared of is that that heiniedl get hold of
him and make us a lot of trouble.      .  .  . That bird had a
                                              guess the best thing to do is
face like staters prison , . .
get a lawyer and start a divorce.” ^‘^But think of the pub-

licity,” wailed Agnes. ^^Anyway,” said Margo, ^^Tony’s
got to pass out of the picture, Pve taken all Pm going to
take from that greaser.”
    Sam Margolies came an hour late. ^^How peaceful,” he
was saying. ^^How can you do it in delirious Hollywood?”
^Why, Margie’s just a quiet little workinggirl,” said
Agnes, picking up her sewingbasket and starting to sidle
out. He sat down in the easychair without taking off his
white beret and stretched out his bowlegs towards the fire.
      hate the artificiality of it.” ^^Don’t you now?” said
Agnes from the door.
    Margo offered him a cocktail but he said he didn’t drink.
When the maid brought out the dinner that Agnes had
worked on all day he wouldn’t eat anything but toast and
lettuce. “I never eat or drink at mealtimes. I come only
to look and to talk.” ^^That’s why you’ve gotten so thin,”
kidded Margo. ^^Do you remember the way I used to be in
 those old days? My New York period. Let’s not talk about
 it. I have no memory. I live only in the present. Now
 I am thinking of the picture you are going to star in. I
 never go to parties but you must come with me to Irwin
 Harris’s tonight. There will be people there you’ll have
 io know. Let me see your dresses. I’ll pick out what you
 bught to wear. After this you must always let me come
         406

1322
when you buy a dress.” Following her up the creaking
stairs to her bedroom he said, “We must have a different
setting for you. This won^t do. This is suburban.”
    Margo felt funny driving out through the avenues of
palms of Beverly Hills sitting beside Sam Margolies.
He^d made her put on the old yellow eveningdress sheM
bought at PiquoFs years ago that Agnes had recently had
done over and lengthened by a little French dressmaker
she’d found in Los Angeles. Her hands were cold and she
was afraid Margolies would hear her heart knocking
against her ribs. She tried to think of something funny to
say but what was the use, Margolies never laughed. She
wondered what he was thinking. She could see his face, the
narrow forehead under his black bang, the pouting lips,
the beaklike profile very dark against the streetlights as
he sat stiffly beside her with his hands on his knees. He still
had on his white flannels and a white stock with a diamond
pm m it in the shape of a golfclub. As the car turned into
a drive towards a row of bright tall frenchwindows through
the trees he turned to her and said, “You are afraid you
will be bored.    .  . . You’ll be surprised. You’ll find we
have something here that matches the foreign and New
York society you are accustomed to.” As he turned his face
towards her the light glinted on the w^hites of his eyes
and sagging pouches under them and the wet broad lips.
He went on whispering squeezing her hand as he helped
her out of the car. “You will be the most elegant woman
there but only as one star is brighter than the other stars.”
    Going into the door past the butler Margo caught her-
self starting to giggle. “How you do go on,” she said.
“You talk like a .       .  . like a genius.” “That’s what they
call me,” said Margolies m a loud voice drawing his shoul-
ders back and standing stiffly at attention to let her go
past him through the large glass doors into the vestibule.
    The worst of it was going into the dressmgroom to take

off her wraps. The women who were doing their faces and

                                                                                407

1323
giving a last pat to their hair all turned and gave her a
quick onceover that started at her slippers, ran up her
stockings, picked out every hook and eye of her dress, ran
round her neck to see if it was wrinkled and up into her
hair to see if it was dyed. At once she knew that she ought
to have an ermine wrap. There was one old dame standing
smoking a cigarette by the lavatory door in a dress all
                                                                           Margo felt
made of cracked ice who had xray eyes 5
her reading the pricetag on her stepins. The colored
maid gave Margo a nice toothy grin as she laid Margo’s
coat over her arm that made her feel better. When she
went out she felt the stares clash together on her back
and hang there like a tin can on a dog’s tail. Keep a stiff
upper lip, they can’t eat you, she was telling herself as the
door of the ladies’ room closed behind her. She wished
Agnes was there to tell her how lovely everybody was.
    Margolies was waiting for her in the vestibule full of
sparkly chandeliers. There was an orchestra playing and
they were dancing in a big room. He took her to the fire-
place at the end. Irwin Harris and Mr. Hardbein who
looked as alike as a pair of eggs in their tight dress suits
came up and said goodevening. Margolies gave them each
a hand without looking at them and sat down by the fire-
place with his back to the crowd in a big carved chair like
the one he had in his ofiice. Mr. Harris asked her to dance
with him. After that it was like any other collection of
dressedup people. At least until she found herself dancing
With Rodney Cathcart.
    She recognized him at once from the pictures, but it was
a shock to find that his face had color in it, and that there
was warm blood and muscle under his rakish eveningdress.
 He was a tall tanned young man with goldfishyellow hair
and an English way of mumbling his words. She’d felt
cold and shivery until she started to dance with him. After
 he’d danced with her once he asked her to dance with him
again. Between dances he led her to the buffet at the end
         408

1324
of the room and tried to get her to drink. She held a
scotch and soda in a big blue glass each time and just sipped

it while he drank down a couple of scotches straight and
ate a large plate of chicken salad. He seemed a little drunk
but he didn’t seem to be getting any drunker. He didn’t
say anything so she didn’t say anything either. She loved
dancing with him.
    Every now and then when they danced round the end of
the room she caught sight of the whole room in the huge
mirror over the fireplace. Once when she got just the right
angle she thought she saw Margolies’ face staring at her
from out of the carved highbacked chair that faced the
burning logs. He seemed to be staring at her attentively.
The firelight playing on his face gave it a warm lively
look she hadn’t* noticed on it before. Immediately blond
heads, curly heads, bald heads, bare shoulders, black shoul-
ders got in her way and she lost sight of that corner of the
room.
    It must have been about twelve o’clock when she found
him standing beside the table where the scotch was. ^^Hello,
Sam,” said Rodney Cathcart. ^^How’s every little thing?”
 ^We must go now, the poor child is tired in all this
noise. . . . Rodney, you must let Miss Dowling go now.”
^^O.K., pal,” said Rodney Cathcart and turned his back to
pour himself another glass of scotch.
    When Margo came back from getting her wraps she
 found Mr. Hardbein waiting for her in the vestibule. He
bowed as he squeezed her hand. ^Well, I don’t mind tell-
 ing you, Miss Dowling, that you made a sensation. The
 girls are all asking what you use to dye your hair wJf'h.”
 A laugh rumbled down into his broad vest. ^Would you
 come by my office? We might have a bite of lunch and talk
 things over a bit.” Margo gave a little shudder. ^Tt’s sweet
 of you, Mr. Hardbein, but I never go to offices ... I
 don’t understand business, ... You call us up, won’t
 you?”

                                                                                 409

1325
   When she got out to the colonial porch there was Rod-
my Cathcart sitting beside Margolies in the long white

car. Margo grinned and got in between them as cool as if

she’d expected to find Rodney Cathcart there all the while.
The car drove off. Nobody said anything. She couldn’t tell
where they were going, the avenues of palms and the
strings of streetlamps all looked alike. They stopped at
a big restaurant. “I thought we’d better have a little
snacL ... You didn’t eat anything all evening,” Mar-
golies said, giving her hand a squeeze as he helped her out
of the car. “That’s the berries,” said Rodney Cathcart
who’d hopped out first. “This dawncing makes a guy
beastly ’ungry.”
    The headwaiter bowed almost to the ground and led
them through the restaurant full of eyes to a table that
had been reserved for them on the edge of the dancefloor.
Margolies ate shreddedwheat biscuits and milk, Rodney
Cathcart ate a steak and Margo took on the end of her
fork a few pieces of a lobsterpatty. “A blighter needs a
drink after that,” grumbled Rodney Cathcart, pushing back
his plate after polishing off the last fried potato. Margolies
raised two fingers. “Here it is forbidden. .       .  . How silly
we are in this country. . . . How silly they are.” He
rolled his eyes towards Margo. She caught a wink in time
to make it just a twitch of the eyelid and gave him that
%low stopped smile he’d made such a fuss over at Palm
 springs. Margolies got to his feet. “Come, Margo darling
... 1 have something to show you.” As she and Rodney
Cathcart followed him out across the red carpet she could
feel ripples of excitement go through the people in the
restaurant the way she’d felt it when she went places in
 Miami after Charley Anderson had been killed.
    Margolies drove them to a big creamcolored apartment-
 house. They went up in an elevator. He opened a door
 with a latchkey and ushered them in. “This,” he said,
 my little bachelor flat.”

         410

1326
   It was a big dark room with a balcony at the end hung
with embroideries. The walls were covered with all kinds
of oilpaintings each lit by a little overhead light of its own.
There were oriental rugs piled one on the other on the
floor and couches round the walls covered with zebra and
lion skins. ^^Oh, what a wonderful place,” said Margo-
Margolies turned to her, smiling. “A bit baronial, eh? The
sort of thing youVe accustomed to see In the castle of a
Castilian grandee.” “Absolutely,” said Margo. Rodney
Cathcart lay down full length on one of the couches. “Say,
Sam old top,” he said, “have you got any of that good
Canadian ale? ’Ow about a little Guinness in it?”
    Margolies went out Into a pantry and the swinging door
closed behind him. Margo roamed around looking at the
brightcolored pictures and the shelves of wriggling Chinese
 figures. It made her feel spooky.
     “Oh, I say,” Rodney Cathcart called from the couch.
 “Come over here, Margo. ... I like you.             .  .  . YouVc
 got to call me Si. .    .  . My friends call me that. It’s more
 American.” “All right by me,” said Margo, sauntering
 towards the couch. Rodney Cathcart put out his hand. “Put

 it there, pal,” he said. When she put her hand in his he
 grabbed it and tried to pull her towards him on the couch.
 “Wouldn’t you like to kiss me, Margo?” He had a terrific

 grip. She could feel how strong he was,
     Margolies came back with a tray with bottles and glasses
 and set it on an ebony stand near the couch. “This is where
 I do my work,” he said. “Genius is helpless without the
 proper environment. ... Sit there.” He pointed to the
 couch where Cathcart was lying. “I shot that lion myself-

  . . . Excuse me a moment.” He went up the stairs to the
  balcony and a light went on up there. Then a door closed
  and the light was cut off. The only light in the room w?i5
  over the pictures. Rodney Cathcart sat up on the edge or
  the couch. “For crissake, sister, drink something. .         . .”
  Margo started to titter. “All right. Si, you can give me a

                                                                                  411

1327
spot of gin,” she said and sat down beside him on the
couch.
   He was attractive. She found herself letting him kiss
her but right away his hand was working up her leg and
she had to get up and walk over to the other side of the
room to look at the pictures again. “Oh, donk be silly,” he
sighed, letting himself drop back on the couch.
    There was no sound from upstairs. Margo began to get
the jeebies wondering what Margolies was doing up there.
She went back to the couch to get herself another spot of
gin and Rodney Cathcart jumped up all of a sudden and
put his arms around her from behind and bit her ear.
“Quit that caveman stuff,” she said, standing still. She
didn’t want to wrestle with him for fear he’d muss her
dress. “That’s me,” he whispered in her ear. “I find you
most exciting.”
    Margolies was standing in front of them with some
papers in his hand. Margo wondered how long he’d been
there. Rodney Cathcart let himself drop back on the couch
and closed his eyes. “Now sit down, Margo darling,”
Margolies was saying in an even voice. “I want to tell you
a story. See if it awakens anything in you.” Margo felt
herself flushing. Behind her Rodney Cathcart was giving
long deep breaths as if he were asleep.
    “You are tired of the giddy whirl of the European
capitals,” Margolies was saying. “You are the daughter of
an old armyofficer. Your mother is dead. You go every-
 where, dances, dinners, affairs. Proposals are made for
 your hand. Your father is a French or perhaps a Spanish
 general. His country calls him. He is to be sent to Africa
 to repel the barbarous Moors. He wants to leave you in
 a convent but you insist on going with him. You are fol-
 lowing this?”
     “Oh, yes,” said Margo eagerly. “She’d stow away on
 the ship to go with him to the war.”
     “On the same boat there’s a young American collegeboy
          412

1328
who has run away to join the foreign legion. We’ll get the
reason later. That’ll be your friend Si. You meet. . . .
Everything is lovely between you. Your father is very ill.
By this time you are in a mud fort besieged by nativeSj
howling bloodthirsty savages. Si breaks through the block-
ade to get the medicine necessary to save your father’s life.

. .   . On his return he’s arrested as a deserter. You rush
to Tangier to get the American consul to intervene. Your
father’s life is saved. You ride back just in time to beat
the firingsquad. Si is an American citizen and is decorated.
The general kisses him on both cheeks and hands his lovely
daughter over into his strong arms. ... I don’t want
you to talk about this now.      . . . Let it settle deep into
your mind. Of course it’s only a rudimentary sketch. The
story is nonsense but it affords the director certain oppor-
tunities. I can see you risking all, reputation, life itself to
save the man you love. Now I’ll take you home.            .   . .
Look, Si’s asleep. He’s just an animal, a brute blond beast.”
    When Margolies put her wrap around her he let his
 hands rest for a moment on her shoulders. “There’s
 another thing I want you to let sink into your heart .         . .
 not your intelligence . .     . your heart. . . . Don’t answer
 me now. Talk it over with your charming companion. A
 little later, when we have this picture done I want you

 to marry me. I am free. Years ago in another world I had
 a wife as men have wives but we agreed to misunderstand
 and went our ways. Now I shall be too busy. You have
 no conception of the intense detailed work involved. When
 I am directing a picture I can think of nothing else, but
 when the creative labor is over, in three months’ time

 perhaps, I want you to marry me. . . . Don’t reply now.”
     They didn’t say anything as he sat beside her on the
 way home to Santa Monica driving slowly through the

 thick white clammy morning mist. When the car drove

 up to her door she leaned over and tapped him on the

                                                                                 413

1329
cheek.               she said, "^youVe given me the loveliest
evening.”
   Agnes was all of a twitter about where she’d been so

late. She was walking around in her dressmggown and
had the lights on all over the house. had a vague brood-
ing feeling after you’d left, Margie. So I called up
Madame Esther to ask her what she thought. She had a
message for me from Frank. You know she said last time
he was trying to break through unfortunate influences.”
^^Oh, AgneSj what did it say?” ^^It said success is in your
grasp, be firm. Oh, Margie, you’ve just got to marry him.

, . . That’s what Frank’s been trying to tell us.” ^^Jimmy
crickets,” said Margo, falling on her bed when she got
upstairs, ^T’m all in. Be a darling and hang up my clothes
for me, Agnes.”
    Margo was too excited to sleep. The room was too light.
She kept seeing the light red through her eyelids. She
must get her sleep. She’d look a sight if she didn’t get
her sleep. She called to Agnes to bring her an aspirin.
   Agnes propped her up in bed with one hand and gave
her the glass of water to wash the aspirin down with the

           it was like when she’d been a little girl and Agnes
other j
used to give her medicine when she was sick. Then sud-
denly she was dreaming that she was just finishing the
Everybody's Doing It number and the pink cave of faces
was roaring with applause and she ran off into the wings
where Frank Mandeville was waiting for her in his black
cloak with his arms stretched wide open, and she ran into
His arms and the cloak closed about her and she was down
with the cloak choking her and he was on top of her claw-
ing at her dress and past his shoulder she could see Tony
laughing, Tony all in white with a white beret and a
diamond golfclub on his stock jumping up and down and
clapping. It must have been her yelling that brought
Agnes. No, Agnes was telling her something. She sat up
in bed shuddering. Agnes was all in a fluster. ^^Oh, it’s

        414

1330
dreadful. Tony’s down there. He insists on seeing you,
Margie. He’s been reading in the papers. You know it’s
all over the papers about how you are starring with
Rodney Cathcart in Mr. Margolies’ next picture. Tony’g
wild. He says he’s your husband and he ought to attend
to your business for you. He says he’s got a legal right.”
^^The little rat,” said Margo. ^^Bring him up here. . * .
What time is it?” She jumped out of bed and ran to the
dressingtable to fix her face. When she heard them com-
ing up the stairs she pulled on her pink lace bedjacket and
jumped back into bed. She was very sleepy when Tonj
came in the room. ^W^hat’s the trouble, Tony?” she said.
    ^T’m starving and here you are making three thousand
a week. . . . Yesterday Max and I had no money for
dinner. We are going to be put out of our apartment. By
rights everything you make is mine. .  . I’ve been too
soft . . . I’ve let myself be cheated.”
    Margo yawned. “We’re not in Cuba, dearie.” She sat
up in bed. “I.ook here, Tony, let’s part friends. The con-
tract isn’t signed yet. Suppose when it is we fix you up a

little so that you and your friend can go and start your
polo school in Havana. The trouble with you is you’re
homesick.”
    “Wouldn’t that be wonderful,” chimed in Agnes. “Cuba
would be just the place . . . with all the tourists going
down there and everything.”
    Tony drew himself up stiffly. “Margo, we are Chris-

tians. We believe. We Imow that the church forbids di-

vorce.  .  .  . Agnes she doesn’t understand.”
    “I’m a lot better Christian than you are .      .  . you know
that you .    . began Agnes shrilly.
    “Now, Agnes, we can’t argue about religion before

breakfast.” Margo sat up and drew her knees up to her

chin underneath the covers. “Agnes and I believe that
Mary Baker Eddy taught the truth, see, Tony. Sit down

here, Tony. . . . You’re getting too fat, Tony, the boys

                                                                               415

1331
won’t like you if you lose your girlish figure*        . .   . Look
here, you and me we’ve seen each other through some
tough times.” He sat on the bed and lit a cigarette. She
stroked the spiky black hair off his forehead. You’re not
going to try to gum the game when I’ve got the biggest
break I ever had in my life.”
    “I been a louse. I’m no good,” Tony said. ^^How about
a thousand a month? That’s only a third of what you
make. You’ll just waste it. Women don’t need money.”
    “Like hell they don’t. You know it costs money to make
money in this business.”
    “All right . .       . make it five hundred. I don’t under-
stand the figures, you know that. You know I’m only a
child.”
    “Well, I don’t either. You and Agnes go downstairs
and talk it over while I get a bath and get dressed. I’ve
got a dressmaker coming and I’ve got to have my hair
done. I’ve got about a hundred appointments this after-
noon. . .    . Good boy, Tony.” She patted him on the
cheek and he went away with Agnes meek as a lamb.
    When Agnes came upstairs again after Margo had had
her bath, she said crossly, “Margie, w^ ought to have di-
vorced Tony long ago. This German who’s got hold of
him is a bad egg. You know how Mr. Hays feels about
scandals.”
    “I know I’ve been a damn fool.”
    “I’ve got to ask Frank about this. I’ve got an appoint-
jiient with Madame Esther this afternoon. Frank might
tell us the name of a reliable lawyer.”
          e can’t go to Vardaman. He’s Mr. Hardbein’s law-
yer and Sam’s lawyer too. A girl sure is a fool ever to put
anything in writing.”
    The phone rang. It was Mr. Hardbein calling up about
the contract. Margo sent Agnes down to the o&e to talk
to him. All afternoon, standing there in front of the long
pierglass while the dressmaker fussed around her with her
         416

1332
mouth full of pins she was worrying about what to do.
When Sam came around at five to see the new dresses
her hair was still in the dryer. ^^How attractive you look
with your head in that thing ” Sam said, ^‘^and the lacy
negligee and the little triangle of Brussels lace between
your knees. ... I shall remember it. I have total recallj
I never forget anything Fve seen. That is the secret of
visual imagination.”
   When Agnes came back for her in the Rolls she had
trouble getting away from Sam. He wanted to take them
wherever they were going in his own car. ^^You must have
no secrets from me, Margo darling,” he said gently. “You
will see I understand everything . . . everything.            .  . .

I know you better than you know yourself. That’s why I
know 1 can direct you. I have studied every plane of your
face and of your beautiful little girlish soul so full ol
desire. .   .  . Nothing you do can surprise or shock me.”
    “That’s good,” said Margo.
    He went away sore.
    “Oh, Margie, you oughtn’t to treat Mr. Margolies like
that,” whined Agnes.
    “I can do without him better than he can do without
me,” said Margo. “He’s got to have a new star. They say
he’s pretty near on the skids anyway.” “Mr. Hardbein
says that’s just because he’s fired his publicityman,” said
Agnes.
    It was late when they got started. Madame Esther’s
house was way downtown in a dilapidated part of Los
Angeles, They had the chauffeur let them out two blocks
from the house and walked to it down an alley between
dusty bungalow courts like the places they’d lived in when
they first came out to the coast years ago. Margo nudged
Agnes^ “Remind you of anything?” Agnes turned to her,
frowning. “We must only remember the pleasant beautiful

things, Margie,”
    Madame Esther’s house was a big old frame house with

                                                                                417

1333
«*^ide porches and cracked shingle roofs. The blinds were
drawn on all the grimy windows. Agnes knocked at a

little groundglass door m back. A thin spinsterish woman
with grey bobbed hair opened it immediately. ^^You are

late/’ she whispered. ^^Madame’s in a state. They don’t

like to be kept waiting. It’ll be difficult to break the chain.”
^^Has she had anything from Frank whispered Agnes.
^^He’s very angry. I’m afraid he won’t answer again.    .  . *
Give me your hand.”
   The woman took Agnes’s hand and Agnes took Margo’s
hand and they went in single file down a dark passageway
that had only a small red bulb burning in it, and through
a door into a completely dark room that was full of people
breathing and shuffling.
          thought it was going to be private,” whispered
Margo. “Shush,” hissed Agnes in her ear. When her eyes
got accustomed to the darkness she could see Madame
Esther’s big puffy face swaying across a huge round table
and faint blurs of other faces around it. They made way
for Agnes and Margo and Margo found herself sitting
down with somebody’s wet damp hand clasped in hers.
On the table in front of Madame Esther were a lot of
little pads of white paper. Everything was quiet except
for Agnes’s heavy breathing next to her.
    It seemed hours before anything happened. Then
Margo saw that Madame Estheris eyes were open but all
she could see was the whites. A deep baritone voice was
coming out of her lips talking a language she didn’t under-
stand. Somebody in the ring answered in the same lan-
guage, evidently putting questions. “That’s Sidi Hassan
the Hindu,” whispered Agnes. “He’s given some splendid
tips on the stockmarket.”
    “Silence,” yelled Madame Esther in a shrill woman’s
voice that almost scared Margo out of her wits. “Frank
is waiting. No, he has been called away. He left a message
that all would be well. He left a message that tomorrow
        418

1334
he would impart the information the parties desired and
that his little girl must on no account take any step with-
out consulting her darling Agnes.”
    Agnes burst into hysterical sobs and a hand tapped
Margo on the shoulder. The same greyhaired woman led
them to the back door again. She had some smellingsalts
that she made Agnes sniff. Before she opened the ground-
glass door she said, “That’ll be fifty dollars, please.
Twentyfive dollars each. . . . And Madame says that the
beautiful girl must not come any more, it might be dan-
gerous for her, we are surrounded by hostile influences.
But Mrs. Mandeville must come and get the messages
Nothing can harm her, Madame says, because she has the
heart of a child.”
    As they stepped out mto the dark alley to find that it
was already night and the lights were on everywhere
Margo pulled her fur up round her face so that nobody
could recognize her.
    “You see, Margie,” Agnes said as they settled back into
the deep seat of the old Rolls, “everything is going to
be all right, with dear Frank watching over us. He means
that you must go ahead and marry Mr. Margolies right
away.” “Well, I suppose it’s no worse than signing a three-
year contract,” said Margo. She told the chauffeur to drive

as fast as he could because Sam was taking her to an open-
ing at Grauman’s that night.
    When they drove up round the drive to the door, the

first thing they saw was Tony and Max Hirsch sitting on
the marble bench in the garden. “I’ll talk to them,” said
Agnes. Margo rushed upstairs and started to dress. She
was sitting looking at herself in the glass in her stepins
when Tony rushed into the room. When he got into the

light over the dressingtable she noticed that he had a black

eye. “Taking up the gentle art, eh, Tony?” she said with^
out turning around.    '

    Tony talked breathlessly. “Max blacked my eye be-

                                                                                419

1335
cause I did not want to come. Margo, he will kill me if
you don’t give me one thousand dollars. We will not leave
the house till you give us a check and we got to have some
cash too, because Max is giving a party tonight and the
bootlegger will not deliver the liquor until he’s paid cash.
Max says you are getting a divorce. How can you? There

is no divorce under the church. It’s a sin that I will not
have on my soul. You cannot get a divorce.”
    Margo got up and turned around t6 face him. ^^Hand
me my negligee on the bed there ... no use catching
my death of cold. . . . Say, Tony, do you think I’m get-
ting too fat? I gained two pounds last week. .        .  . Look
here, Tony, that squarehead’s going to be the ruination
of you. You better cut him out and go away for another
cure somewhere. I’d hate to have the federal dicks get
hold of you on a narcotic charge. They made a big raid
in San Pedro only yesterday.”
   Tony burst into tears. ^Wou’ve got to give it to me.
He’ll break every bone in my body.”
    Margo looked at her wristwatch that lay on the dress-
ingtable beside the big powderbox. Eight o’clock. Sam
would be coming by any minute now. ^^All right,” she
said, ^^but next time this house is going to be guarded by
detectives. . .   . Get that,” she said. ^^And any monkey-
business and you birds land in jail. If you I'think Sam
Margolies can’t keep it out of the papers you’ve got an-
other think coming. Go downstairs and tell Agnes to make
you out a check and give you any cash she has in the
house.” Margo went back to her dressing.
   A few minutes later Agnes came up crying. ^What shall
we do? I gave them the check and two hundred dollars.

. . . Oh, it’s awful. Why didn’t Frank warn us? I know
he’s watching over us but he might have told us what to
do about that dreadful man.” Margo went into" her dress-
closet and slipped into a brand new eveninggown. ^What
We’ll do is ^op that check first thing in the morning. You
        42c

1336
call up the homeprotection ofEce and get two detectm;»
out here on day and night duty right away. Pm through^
tharis all.”
    Margo was mad, she was striding up and down the
room in her new white spangly dress with a trimming of
ostrich feathers. She caught sight of herself in the big
triple mirror standing between the beds. She went over
and stood in front of it. She looked at the three views of
herself in the white spangly dress. Her eyes were a flash-
ing blue and her cheeks were flushed. Agnes came up
behind her bringing her the rhinestone band she was going
to wear in her hair. ^^Oh, Margie,” she cried, ^^you never
looked so stunning.”
    The maid came up to say that Mr. Margolies was wait-
ing. Margo kissed Agnes and said, ^‘^You won^t be scared
with the detectives, will you, dearie Margo pulled the
ermine wrap that they’d sent up on approval that after-
noon round her shoulders and walked out to the car.
Rodney Cathcart was there lolling in the back seat in his
dressclothes. A set of perfect teeth shone in his long brown
face when he smiled at her, Sam had got out to help her

in, ^^Margo darling, you take our breaths away, I knew
that was the right dress,” he said. His eyes were brighter
than usual. ^^Tonight’s a very important night It is the
edict of the stars. Pll tell you about it later. I’ve had our
horoscopes cast.”
    In the crowded throbbing vestibule Margo and Rodney
Cathcatt had to stop at the microphone to say a few words
about their new picture and their association with Sam
Margolies as they went in through the beating glare of

lights and eyes to the lobby. When the master of cere-
monies tried to get Margolies to speak he turned his back
angrily and walked into the theater as if it was empty, not
looking to the right or the left After the show they went
to a restaurant and sat at a table for a while. Rodney
Cathcart ordered some kidtieychops. ^^You mustn’t eat too

                                                                                421

1337
much, Si,” said Margolies. “The piece de resistance is at
my flat.”
    Sure enough there was a big table set out with cold
salmon and lobstersalad and a Filipino butler opening
champagne for just the three of them when they went
back there after the restaurant had started to thin out.
This time Margo tore loose and ate and drank all she
could hold. Rodney Cathcart put away almost the whole
salmon, muttering that it was topping and even Sam, say-
ing he was sure it would kill him, ate a plate .of lobster-
salad.
    Margo was dizzygiggly drunk when she found that the
Filipino and Sam Margolies had disappeared and that she
and Si were sitting together on the couch that had the
lionskin on it. “So youVe going to marry Sam,” said Si,
gulping down a glass of champagne. She nodded. “Good
girl.” Si took off his coat and vest and hung them care-
fully on a chair. “Hate clothes,” he said. “You must come
to my ranch. . .      . Hot stuff.” “But you wear them so
beautifully,” said Margo. “Correct,” said Si.
    He reached over and lifted her into his knee. “But,
Si, we oughtn’t to, not on Sam’s lionskin.” Si put his mouth
to hers and kissed her. “You find me exciting? You ought
to see me stripped.” “Don’t, don’t,” said Margo. She
couldn’t help it, he was too strong, his hands were all over
her under her dress.
    “Oh, hell, I don’t give a damn,” she said. He went
over and got her another glass of champagne. For him-
self he filled a bowl that had held ‘cracked ice earlier in
 the evening. “As for that lion it’s bloody rot. Sam shot it
but the blighter shot it in a zoo. They were sellin’ off
 some old ones at one of the bloody lionfarms and they
 had a shoot. Couldn’t miss ’em. It was a bloody crime.”
 He drank down the champagne and suddenly jumped at
 her. She fell on the couch with his arms crushing her.
     She was dizzy. She walked up and down the room
         4Z2

1338
trying to catch her breath. ^^Goodnightj hot sketch,^^ Si
said and carefully put on his coat and vest again and was
gone out the door. She was dizzy.
    Sam was back and was showing her a lot of calculations
on a piece of paper. His eyes bulged shiny into her face
as she tried to read. His hands were shaking. ^^It’s tonight/’
he kept saying, ^ht’s tonight that our lifelines cross.     .  . .
We are married whether we wish it or not. I don’t believe
in freewill. Do you, darling Margo?”
    Margo was dizzy. She couldn’t say anything. '^Come,
dear child, you are tired.” Margolies’ voice burred sooth-
ingly In her ears. She let him lead her into the bedroom
and carefully take her clothes off and lay her between thn
black silk sheets of the big poster bed.
    It was broad daylight when Sam drove her back to the
house. The detective outside touched his hat as they turned
into the drive. It made her feel good to see the man’s big
pugface as he stood there guarding her house. Agnes was
up and walking up and down In a padded flowered dress-
inggown in the livingroom with a newspaper in her hand.
“Where have you been?” she cried. “Oh, Margie, you’ll
ruin your looks If you go on like this and you’re just get-
ting a start too.      .  .  . Look at this .      .  . now don’t be
shocked .  .  . remember it’s all for the best.”
    She handed the Tmes to Margo, pointing out a head-
line with the sharp pink manicured nail of her forefinger.
“Didn’t I tell you Frank was watching over us?”

       HOLLYWOOD EXTRA SLAIN AT PARTY
                        Noted Polo Player Disappears

                                      Sailors Held
    Two enlisted men in uniform, George Cook and Fred Cos-
tello, from the battleship Kenesaw were held for questioning
when they were found stupefied with liquor or narcotics in the
basement of an apartment house at 2234 Higueras Drive, San
Pedro, where residents allege a drunken party had been ir

                                                                               423

1339
progress all night. Neai them was found the body of a young
man whose skull had been fractured by a blow from a blunt
instrument who was identified as a Cuban, Antonio Garrido,
erstwhile extra on several prominent studio lots. He was still
breathing when the police broke m in response to telephoned
complaints from the neighbors. The fourth member of the
party, a German citizen named Max Hirsch, supposed by some
to be an Austrian nobleman, who shared an apartment at
Mimosa in a fashionable bungalow court with the handsome
young Cuban, had fled before police reached the scene of the
tragedy. At an early hour this morning he had not yet been
located by the police.

    Margo felt the room swinging in great circles around
her head. ^^Oh, my God,” she said. Going upstairs she had
to hold tight to the baluster to keep from failing. She
tore off her clothes and ran herself a hot bath and lay
back in it with her eyes closed.
    ^^Oh, Margie,” wailed Agnes from the other room,
^‘your lovely new gown is a wreck.”

    Margo and Sam Margolies flew to Tucson to be mar-
ried. Nobody was present except Agnes and Rodney
Cathcart. After the ceremony Margolies handed the jus-
tice of the peace a new hundreddollar bill* The going was
pretty bumpy on the way back and the big rattly Ford tri-
motor gave them quite a shakingup crossing the desert.
Margolies’ face was all colors under his white beret but
he said it was delightful. Rodney Cathcart and Agnes
vomited frankly into their cardboard containers. Margo
felt her pretty smile tightening into a desperate grin but
she managed to keep the wedding breakfast down. When
the plane came to rest at the airport at last, they kept the
cameramen waiting a half an hour before they could trust
themselves to come down the gangplank flushed and smil-
ing into a rain of streamers and confetti thrown by th6
attendants and the whir of the motionpicture cameras*
        414

1340
Rodney Cathcart had to drink most of a pint of scotch
before he could get his legs not to buckle under him,
Margo wore her smile over a mass of yellow orchids that
had been waiting for her in the refrigerator at the airport,
and Agnes looked tickled to death because Sam had bought
her orchids too, lavender ones, and insisted that she stride
down the gangplank into the cameras with the rest of
them.
    It was a relief after the glare of the desert and the
lurching of the plane in the airpockets to get back to the
quiet dressingroom at the lot. By three o’clock they were
in their makeup. In a small room in the ground floor
Margolies went right back to work taking closeups of
Margo and Rodney Cathcart in a clinch against the back-
ground of a corner of a mud fort. Si was stripped to the
waist with two cartridgebelts crossed over his chest and
a canvas legionnaire’s kepi on his head and Margo was
in a white eveningdress with highheeled satin slippers.
They were having trouble with the clinch on account of
the cartridgebelts. Margolies with his porcelainhandled
cane thrashing in front of him kept strutting back and
forth from the little box he stood on behind the camera
into the glare of the klieg light where Margo and Si
clinched and unclinched a dozen times before they hit a
position that suited him. ^^My dear Si,” he was sayings
^^you must make them feel it. Every ripple of your muscles
must make them feel passion . . . you are stiff like a
wooden doll. They all love her, a piece of fragile beau-
tiful palpitant womanhood ready to give all for the man
she loves. . . . Margo darling, you faint, you let your-
self go in his arms. If his strong arms weren’t there to
catch you you would fall to the ground. Si, my dear fel-
low, you are not an athletic instructor teaching a young
lady to swim, you are a desperate lover facing death. . .     .
They all feel they are you, you are loving her for them,
the millions who want love and beauty and excitement,

                                                                                425

1341
but forget them, loosen up, my dear fellow, forget that
I’m here and the camera’s here, you are alone together
snatching a desperate moment, you are alone except for
your two beating hearts, you and the most beautiful girl

in the world, the nation’s newest sweetheart. . . . All

right . .      . hold it.      .   . . Camera.”




                                                    NEWSREEL LXIII



        but a few minutes later this false land disappeared as
quickly and as mysteriously as it had come and I found before
me the long stretch of the silent sea with not a single sign of

life in sight

                   Whrpfoorwills call
                       And evening is mgh
                           I hurry to             ^ my blue heaven

LINDBERGH IN PERIL AS WAVE TRAPS HIM IN
                                  CRUISER’S BOW

            Down in the Tennessee mountains
                 Away jrom the sins of the world
             Old Dan Kelly^s son there he leaned on his gun
                 AthinJmd of 2ieh Turney^s girl

           ACCLAIMED BY HUGE CROWDS IN THE STREETS

                    Snaps Pictures From Dizzy Yardarm

                 Dan was a hotblooded youngster
                     His Dad raised him uf sturdy an^ right

             ENTHRALLED BY DARING DEED CITY CHEERS
                           FROM DEPTHS OF ITS HEART

                          FLYER SPORTS IN AIR
         426

1342
              His hear t in a whirl with his love for the girl
                  He loaded his doubleharreled gun

       LEADERS OF PUBLIC LIFE BREAK INTO
                   UPROAR AT SIGHT OF FLYER

                                 CONFUSION IN HOTEL

        Aviator Nearly Hurled From Auto as it Leaps Forward
Through Gap in Crowd

             Over the mountains he wandered
                 This son of a Tennessee man
                      With fire in his eye and his gun by his side
                 Alooking for Zeb Turney^s clan

                   SHRINERS PARADE IN DELUGE OF RAIN

                        Paper Blizzard Chokes Broadway

                    Shots nnghd out through the mountam
                        Shots nngvrd out through the breeze

              LINDY TO HEAD BIG AIRLINE

          ^he story of Dan Kelly^s moonshine

              Is sfread far and wide o^er the world
          How Dan killed the clan shot them down to a man
              And brought back old Zeb Turney^s girl

          a short, partly bald man, his face set in tense emotion, ran

 out from a mass of people where he had been concealed and

 climbed quickly into the plane as if afraid he might be stopped.

 He had on ordinary clothes and a leather vest instead of a coat
 He was bareheaded. He crowded down beside Chamberlin

 looking neither at the crowd nor at his own wife who stood 2

  little m front of the plane and at one side, her eyes big with

  wonder. The motor roared and the plane started down the

  runway, stopped and came back again and then took off per^*

  fectly




                                                                                          427

1343
                                                            ARCHITECT


        A muggy day in late spring in eighteen eighty-
seven a tall youngster of eighteen with fine eyes and a
handsome arrogant way of carrying his head arrived in
Chicago with seven dollars left in his pocket from buy-
ing his ticket from Madison with some cash he’d got by
pawning Plutarch’s Lives, a Gibbon’s Decline and Fall
 3/ the Roman Emfire and an old furcollared coat.
        Before leaving home to make himself a career in
an architect’s office (there was no architecture course at
Wisconsin to clutter his mind with stale Beaux Arts
                     the youngster had seen the dome of the
drawings) 5
new State Capitol in Madison collapse on account of
bad rubblewotk in the piers, some thieving contractors’
skimping materials to save the politicians their rakeoff,
and perhaps a trifling but deadly error in the archi-
tect’s plans 5
        he never forgot the roar of burst masonry, 'the
flying plaster, the soaring dustcloud, the mashed bodies
of the dead and dying being carried out, set faces livid
with plasterdust.
        Walking round downtown Chicago, crossing and
recrossing the bridges over the Chicago River in the
jingle and clatter of traffic, the rattle of vans and
loaded wagons and the stamping of big drayhorses and
the hooting of towboats with barges and the rumbling
whistle of lakesteamers waiting for the draw,
        he thought of the great continent stretching a
thousand miles east and south and north, three thou-
sand miles west, and everywhere,, at mineheads, on the
shores of newlydredged harbors, along watercourses, at
the intersections of railroads, sprouting
        shacks roundhouses tipples grainelevators stores
warehouses tenements, great houses for the wealthy set
        428

1344
                            .



in broad treeshaded lawns, domed statehouses on hills,
hotels churches operahouses auditoriums.
        He walked with long eager steps
        towards the untrammeled future opening in every
direction for a young man who’d keep his hands to his
work and his wits sharp to invent.
        The same day he landed a job in an architect’s
office.



        Frank Lloyd Wright was the grandson of a Welsh
hatter and preacher who’d settled in a rich Wiscon-
sin valley, Spring Valley, and raised a big family of
farmers and preachers and schoolteachers there.
Wright’s father was a preacher too, a restless illadjusted
Newenglander who studied medicine, preached in a
Baptist church in Weymouth, Massachusetts, and then
as a Unitarian in the middle west, taught music, read
Sanskrit and finally walked out on his family.
         Young Wright was born on his grandfather’s farm,
went to school in Weymouth and Madison, worked
summers on a farm of his uncle’s in Wisconsin.
         His training in architecture was the reading of
Viollet le Due, the apostle of the thirteenth century
and of the pure structural mathematics of gothic stone-
masonry, and the seven years he worked with Louis
Sullivan in the office of Adler and Sullivan in Chicago.
 (It was Louis Sullivan who, after Richardson, invented
whatever was invented in nineteenthcentury architec-
ture in America)
         When Frank Lloyd Wright left Sullivan he had
already launched a distinctive style, prairie architecture.
In Oak Park he built broad suburban dwellings for

rich men that were the first buildings to break the hold
on American builders’ minds of centuries of pastward

routine, of the wornout capital and plinth and pedi-

                                                                               429

1345
ment dragged through the centuries from the Acropolis,
and the jaded traditional stencils of Roman masonry,
the halfobliterated Palladian copybooks.
        Frank Lloyd Wright was cutting out a new avenue
that led towards the swift constructions in glassbricks
and steel
        foreshadowed today.
        Delightedly he reached out for the new materials,

steel in tension, glass, concrete, the million new metals
and alloys.
        The son and grandson of preachers, he became a
preacher in blueprints,
        projecting constructions in the American future
instead of the European past.
         Inventor of plans,
        plotter of tomorrow’s girderwork phrases,
        he preaches to the young men coming of age in
the time of oppression, cooped up by the plasterboard
partitions of finance routine, their lives and plans made
poor by feudal levies of parasite money standing
astride every process to shake down progress for the
cutting of coupons:

         The froferly citified citizen has become a broker,
dealing chiefly in human frailties or the ideas and
inventions of others, a -puller of levers, a -presser of
buttons of vicarious power, his by way of machine
craft .    .  . and over beside him and beneath him, even
m his heart as he sleeps, is the taximeter of rent, m
some form to goad this anxious consumer's unceasing
struggle for or against more or less merciful or mer-
ciless money increment.

         To the young men who spend their days and
nights drafting the plans for new rented aggregates of
rented cells upended on hard pavements,
         430

1346
      , he preaches
        the horizons of his boyhood,
        a future that is not the rise of a few points in a
hundred selected stocks, or an increase in carloadings,
or a multiplication of credit in the bank or a rise in the
rate on callmoney,
        but a new clean construction, from the ground up,
based on uses and needs,
        towards the American future instead of towards
the painsmeared past of Europe and Asia. Usonia he
calls the broad teeming band of this new nation across
the enormous continent between Atlantic and Pacific.
He preaches a project for Usonia:


        It is easy to realize how the comflexity of crucLe
utilitarian construction in the mechanical infancy of
our growthy like the crude scaffolding for some noble
buildingy did violence to the landscape. . . . The crude
purpose of pioneering days has been accomplished. The
scaffolding may be taken down and the true worky the
culture of a civilization, may appear.

        Like the life of many a preacher, prophet, ex-
horter, Frank Lloyd Wright’s life has been stormy.
He has raised children, had rows with wives, over-
stepped boundaries, got into difficulties with the law',

divorcecourts, bankruptcy, always the yellow press
yapping at his heels, his misfortunes yelled out in head-

lines in the evening papers: affairs with women, the
nightmare horror of the burning of his house in Wis-

consin.
         By a curious irony
         the building that is most completely his is the Im-
perial Hotel in Tokyo that was one of the few struc-

tures to come unharmed through the earthquake of

 1923 (the day the cable came telling him that the

                                                                                431

1347
                                                                                             .




building had stood saving so many hundreds of lives
he writes was one of his happiest days)
        and it was reading in German that most Ameri-
cans first learned of his work.
        His life has been full of arrogant projects unac-
complished. (How often does the preacher hear his
voice echo back hollow from the empty hall, the drafts-
man watch the dust fuzz over the carefullycontrived
plans, the architect see the rolledup blueprints curl
yellowing and brittle in the filingcabinet.)
        Twice he’s rebuilt the house where he works in his
grandfather’s valley in Wisconsin after fires and disas-
ters that would have smashed most men forever.
        He works in Wisconsin,
        an erect spare whitehaired man, his sons are archi-
tects, apprentices from all over the world come to work
with him,
        drafting the new city (he calls it Broadacre City)
        Near and Far are beaten (to imagine the new city
you must blot out every ingrained habit of the past,
build a nation from the ground up with the new tools).
For the architect there are only uses:
        the incredible multiplication of functions, strength
and tension in metal,
        the dynamo, the electric coil, radio, the photo-
electric cell, the internalcombustion motor,
        glass
        concrete 5
        and needs. (Tell us, doctors of philosophy, what
are the needs of a man. At least a man needs to be
notj ailed notafraid nothungry notcold not without love,
not a worker for a power he has never seen
         that cares nothing fof the uses and needs of a
man or a woman or a child.)
         Building a building is building the lives of the
Workers and dwellers in the building.
         432

1348
                                                                              —             '



        The buildings determine dvilization as the cells
in the honeycomb the functions of bees.
        Perhaps in spite of himself the arrogant drafts-
man, the dilettante in concrete, the bohemian artist for
wealthy ladies desiring to pay for prominence with the
startling elaboration of their homes has been forced by
the logic of uses and needs, by the lifelong struggle
against the dragging undertow of money in mortmain,
        to draft plans that demand for their fulfillment a
new lifej
        only in freedom can we build the Usonian city.
His plans are coming to life. His blueprints, as once
Walt Whitman’s words, stir the young men;
         Frank Lloyd Wright,
        patriarch of the new liuilding,
         not without honor except in his own country.



                                                NEWSREEL LXIV


WEIRD FISH DRAWN FROM SARGASSO SEA

        by night when the rest of the plant was still dim figures
ugly in gasmasks worked in the long low building back of the
research laboratory
                    RUM RING LINKS NATIONS

                        All around the water tank
                            Waitin’ for a tram

                          WOMAN SLAIN MATE HELD

       Business Men Not Alarmed Over Coming Election

GRAVE FOREBODING UNSETTLES MOSCOW

                 LABOR CHIEFS RULED OUT OF PULPITS

                                                                                433

1349
        imagination boggles at the reports from Moscow. These
murderers have put themselves beyond the pale. They have
shown themselves to be the mad dogs of the world

   WALLSTREET EMPLOYERS BANISH CHRISTMAS WORRIES AS
                                    BONUSES ROLL IN

                         Lejt my girl in the mountains
                             Left he*- sta?idin^ in the ram

            OUR AIR SUPREMACY ACCLAIMED

               LAND SO MOUNTAINOUS IT STANDS ON END

                       Got myself m trouble
                           An^ shot a county sherif down

        In The Stealth of the Night Have You Heard Padded
feet Creeping Towards You?*

          TROTZKY OPENS ATTACK ON STALIN

                          Strangled Man Dead in Street

                           Moamn^ low .. .
                                My sweet man^s gonna go

               HUNT HATCHET WOMAN WHO ATTACKED
                                     SOCIETY MATRON

                     CLASPS HANDS OF HEROES

        GIRL DYING IN MYSTERY PLUNGE

  He^s the kind of man that needs the kind of woman like me

                   Completely Lost In Fog over Mexico

                                 ASSERT RUSSIA RISING

                   For Pm dancin^ with tears in my eyes

                       ^Cause the girl in my arms isn^t you

                600 PUT TO DEATH AT ONCE IN CANTON

                     SEE BOOM YEAR AHEAD
         434.

1350
                                                                                             ;




        this checking we do for you in our investors consultin
service, we analyze every individual security you own^and giv;
you an impartial report and rating thereon. Periodically
through the year we keep you posted on important develop-
ments. If danger signals suddenly develop we advise you
promptly


                               THE CAMERA EYE (49)


        walking from Plymouth to North Plymouth through

'the raw air of Massachusetts Bay at each step a small cold

jsquudge through the sole of one shoe

        looking out past the grey framehouses under the

robmsegg April sky across the white dories anchored in

the bottleclear shallows across the yellow sandbars and the

slaty bay ruffling to blue to the eastward

        this is where the immigrants landed the roundheads

the sackers of castles the kingkillers haters of oppression

this is where they stood in a cluster after landing from

the crowded ship that stank of bilge          on the beach that

belonged to no one         between the ocean that belonged

to no one and the enormous forest that belonged to no

one that stretched over the hills where the deertracks were

up the green rivervalleys where the redskins grew their

tall corn in patches forever into the incredible west

         for threehundred years the immigrants toiled into th f

west

        and now today

                                                                                435

1351
       walking from Plymouth to North Plymouth sud-

denly round a bend in the road beyond a little pond and

yellowtwigged willows hazy with green you see the

Cordage       huge sheds and buildings companyhouses all

the same size all grimed the same color a great square

chimney long roofs sharp ranked squares and oblongs cut-

ting oS the sea           the Plymouth Cordage            this is

where another immigrant worked hater of oppression who

wanted a world unfenced when they fired him from

the cordage he peddled fish           the immigrants in the

dark framehouses knew him bought his fish listened to

his talk following his cart around from door to door

you ask them What was he like? why are they scared to

talk of Bart scared because they knew him scared eyes

narrowing black with fright?           a barber the man in the

little grocerystore the woman he boarded with                  in

scared voices they ask Why won^t they believe We knew

him We seen him every day Why won’t they believe that

day we buy the eels*^

        only the boy isn’t scared

        pencil scrawls in my notebook the scraps of recollec-

tion the broken halfphrases the effort to intersect word

with word to dovetail clause with clause to rebuild out of

rgiangled memories unshakably (Oh Pontius Pilate) the

truth

        the boy walks shyly browneyed beside me to the sta-

tion talks about how Bart helped him with his homework

        436

1352
wants to get ahead         why should it hurt him to have
known Bart? wants to go to Boston University we

shake hands      don^t let them scare you

       accustomed the smokingcar       accustomed the jum

ble of faces rumble cozily homelike towards Boston

through the gathering dark how can I make them feel

how our fathers our uncles haters of oppression came to

this coast how say Don^t let them scare you how

make them feel who are your oppressors America

        rebuild the ruined words worn slimy in the mouths

of lawyers districtattorneys collegepresidents judges

without the old words the immigrants haters of oppression

brought to Plymouth how can you know who are your

betrayers America

        or that this fishpeddler you have in Charlestown Jail

is one of your founders Massachusetts?




                                                  NEWSREEL LXV


         STORM TIES UP SUBWAY; FLOODS AND LIGHTNING
                                     DARKEN CITY

                      ZjOve oh love oh careless love
                          Like a thief comes in the night

     ONLOOKERS CRY HALLELUJAH AS PEACE
                 DOVE LIGHTS; SAID TO HAVE
                                 SPLIT $100,000

                                                                                437

1353
                  CRASH UPSETS EXCHANGE

            Chicago Nipple Slump Hits Trading On Curb

            Bring me a fillow for my foor head
                 A hammer for to knock out my brains
            For the whiskey has ruined this body of mine
                 And the red lights have run me insane

                       FAITH PLACED IN RUBBER BOATS

               But Pll love my baby ill the sea runs dry

        This Great New Searchlight Sunburns You Two Miles

A.way

                      Till the rocks all dissolve by the sun
                                Ok oinH it hard?

        Smythe according to the petition was employed testing the
viscosity of lubricating oil in the Okmulgee plant of the com-
pany on July 12, 1924. One of his duties was to pour benzol
on a hot vat where it was boiled down so that the residue could
be examined. Day after day he breathed the not unpleasant
fumes from the vat.
        One morning about a year later Smythe cut his face while
shaving and noticed that the blood flowed for hours in copious
quantities from the tiny wound. His teeth also began to bleed
when he brushed them and when the flow failed to stop after
several days he consulted a doctor. The diagnosis was that the
benzol fumes had broken down the walls of his blood vessels.
        After eighteen months m bed, during which he slept only
under the effect of opiates, Smythe’s spleen and tonsils were
removed. Meanwhile the periodic blood transfusions were re-
sorted to in an effort to keep his blood supply near normal.
         In all more than thirty-six pints of blood were infused
through his arms until when "^he veins had been destroyed it
was necessary to cut into his body to open other veins. During
the whole time up to eight hours before his death, the com-
plaint recited, he was conscious and in pain.


          438

1354
                                                   MARY FRENCH


   The first job Mary French got in New York she got
through one of Ada’s friends. It was sitting all day in an
artgallery on Eighth Street where there was an exposition
of sculpture and answering the questions of ladies in flow-
ing batiks who came in in the afternoons to be seen ap-
preciating art. After two weeks of that the girl she was
replacing came back and Mary who kept telling herself
she wanted to be connected with something real went and
got herself a job in the ladies’ and misses’ clothing de-
partment at Bloomingdale’s. When the summer layoff
came she was dropped, but she went home and wrote an
article about departmentstore workers for the Freeman
and on the strength of it got herself a job doing research
on wages, livingcosts and the spread between wholesale
and retail prices in the dress industry for the International
Ladies’ Garment Workers. She liked the long hours dig-
ging out statistics, the talk with the organizers, the wise-
cracking radicals, the working men and girls who came
into the crowded dingy office she shared with two or three
other researchworkers. At last she felt what she was doing
was real.
    Ada had gone to Michigan with her family and had
left Mary in the apartment on Madison Avenue. Mary
was relieved to have her gone; she was still fond of her
but their interests were so different and they had silly
arguments about the relative importance of art and social

justice that left them tired and cross at each other so that
sometimes they wouldn’t speak for several days; and then
they hated each other’s friends. Still Mary couldn’t help
being fond of Ada. They were such old friends and Ada
forked out so generously for the strikers’ defense com-
mittees, legalaid funds and everything that Mary sug-
gested; she was a very openhanded girl, but her point of

                                                                                439

1355
bathrobe and jumped up and opened the door. Ben Comp-
ton stood there trembling wearing a long unionsuit. HeM
taken off his glasses and they’d left a red band across the
bridge of his nose. His hair was rumpled and his knobby
feet were bare. ^^Comrade,” he stammered, “d’you mind
if I    .  .  . d’you mind if I .      .  . d’you mind if I lie on the
bed beside you.? I can’t sleep. I can’t stay alone.” ^^You
poor boy. . .    . Get into bed, you are shivering,” she said.
She lay down beside him still wearing her bathrobe and
slippers.
    “Shall I put out the light?” He nodded. “Would you
like some aspirin?” He shook his head. She pulled the
covers up under his chin as if he were a child. He lay there
on his back staring with wideopen black eyes at the ceiling.
His teeth were clenched. She put her hand on his forehead
as she would on a child’s to see if he was feverish. He
shuddered and drew away. “Don’t touch me,” he said.
    Mary put out the light and tried to compose herself to
sleep on the bed beside him. After a while he grabbed her
hand and held it tight. They lay there in the dark side
by side staring up at the ceiling. Then she felt his grip on
                              he was dropping off to sleep. She lay
her hand loosen 3
there beside him with her eyes open. She was afraid the
slightest stir might wake him. Every time she fell asleep
she dreamed that detectives were breaking in the door and
woke up with a shuddering start.
    Next morning when she went out to go to the office he
was still asleep. She left a latchkey for him and a note
explaining that there was food and coffee in the icebox.
When she got home that afternoon her heart beat fast as
she went up in the elevator.
    Her first thought after she’d opened the door was that
he’d gone. The bedroom was empty. Then she noticed that
the bathroom door was closed and that a sound of hum-
ming came from there. She tapped. “That you, Comrade
Compton?” she said.

        442

1356
            right out.’^ His voice sounded firmer, more like
the deep rich voice he’d addressed the meeting in. He
came out smiling, long pale legs bristling with black hairs
sticking oddly out from under Mary’s lavender bathrobe.
    ^^Hello, I’ve been taking a hot bath. This is the third
I’ve taken. Doctor said they were a good thing. ... You
know, relax. .   . .” He pulled out a pinkleather edition of
Oscar Wilde’s Dorian Grey from under his arm and shook
it in front of her. “Reading this tripe. ... I fee] "
                                                                                      'tter.

. .   . Say, comrade, whose apartment is this anyway?”
    “A friend of mine who’s a violinist. . , . She’s away
till fall.” “I wish she was here to play for us. I’d love to
hear some good music.      .  . . Maybe you’re musical.”
Mary shook her head.
    “Could you eat some supper? I’ve brought some in.”
“I’ll try       .  .  . nothing too rich .        .  . I’ve gotten very
dyspeptic. ... So you thought I spoke all right*”’ “I
thought it was wonderful,” she said.
    “After supper I’ll look at the papers you brought in.
... If the kept press only wouldn’t always garble what
we say.”
    She heated some peasoup and made toast and bacon and
eggs and he ate up everything she gave him. While they
were eating they had a nice cozy talk about the movement.
She told him about her experiences in the great steelstrike.
She could see he was beginning to take an interest in her.
They’d hardly finished eating before he began to turn
white. He went to the bathroom and threw up.
    “Ben, you poor kid,” she said when he came back look-
ing haggard and shaky. “It’s awful.”
    “Funny,” he said in a weak voice. “When I was in the
Bergen County jail over there in Jersey I came out feel-
ing fine   .  . . but this time it’s hit me.” “Did they treat
you badly?” His teeth clenched and the muscles of his
jaw stiffened, but he shook his head. Suddenly he grabbed
her hand and his eyes filled with tears. “Mary French,

                                                                                443

1357
youVe being too good to me,” he said. Mary couldn’t help
throwing her arms around him and hugging him. ^^You
don’t know what it means to find a . .  to find a sweet
girl comrade,” he said, pushing her gently away. “Now
let me see what the papers did to what I said.”
    After Ben had been hiding out in the apartment for
about a week the two of them decided one Saturday night

that they loved each other. Mary was happier than she’d
ever been in her life. They romped around like kids all
Sunday and went out walking in the park to hear the band
play in the evening. They threw sponges at each other in
the bathroom and teased each other while they were get-
                           they slept tightly clasped in each other’s
ting undressed 3
arms.
    In spite of never going out except at night, in the next
few days Ben’s cheeks began to have a Tittle color in them
and his step began to get some spring into it. “You’ve
made me feel like a man again, Mary,” he’d tell her a
dozen times a day. “Now I’m beginning to feel like I
could do something again. After all the revolutionary
labor movement’s just beginning in this country. The tide’s
going to turn, you watch. It’s begun with Lenin and
Trotzky’s victories in Russia.” There was something mov-
ing to Mary in the way he pronounced those three words:
Lenin, Trotzky, Russia.
    After a couple of weeks he began to go to conferences
with radical leaders. She never knew if she’d find him in
or not when she got home from work. Sometimes it was
three or four in the morning before he came in tired and
haggard. Always his pockets bulged with literature and
leaflets. Ada’s fancy livingroom gradually filled up with
badlyprinted newspapers and pamphlets and mimeo-
graphed sheets. On the mantelpiece among Ada’s dresden-
china figures playing musical instruments were stacked the
three volumes of Captd with places marked in them wiA
pencils. In the evening he’d s-ead Mary pieces of a pam-
        444

1358
phlet he was working on, modeJed on Leninas Whath to
Be Done? and ask her with kmtt<^d brows if he was clear^
it simple workers would understatid what he meant.
    One Sunday in August he made her go with him to
Coney Island where he’d made an appointment to meet
his folksy he’d figured it would be easier to see them in
a crowded place. He didn’t want the dicks to trail him
home and then be bothering the old people or his sister
who had a good job as secretary to a prominent business-
man. When they met it was some time before the Comp-
tons noticed Mary at all. They sat at a big round table
at Stauch’s and drank nearbeer. Mary found it hard to

sit still in her chair when the Comptons all turned theit
eyes on her at once. The old people were very polite with
gentle manners but she could see that they wished she
hadn’t come. Ben’s sister Gladys gave her one hard mean
stare and then paid no attention to her. Ben’s brother
Sam, a stout prosperouslooking Jew who Ben had said
had a small business, a sweatshop probably, was polite and

oily. Only Izzy, the youngest brother, looked anything

like a workingman and he was more likely a gangster.
He treated her with kidding familiarity, she could see he
thought of her as Ben’s moll. They all admired Ben, she
                   he was the bright boy, the scholar, but they
could see 5
felt sorry about his radicalism as if it was an unfortunate

sickness he had contracted. Still his name in the paper,

 the applause in Madison Square Garden, the speeches call-

ing him a workingclass hero had impressed them. After
Ben and Mary had left the Comptons and were going into

the subwaystation, Ben said bitterly in her ear, ^^Well,

that’s the Jewish family. .  . What do you think of it?
Some straitjacket. . . . It’ud be the same if I killed a
man or ran a string of whorehouses . . . even in the
movement you can’t break away from them.” ^^But, Ben,

it’s got its good side . . . they’d do anything in the world

                                                                                445

1359
for you   .  .  . my mother and me we really hate each
other.”
                                                                      she never had
    Ben needed clothes and so did Mary 3
any of the money from the job left over from week to
week, so for the first time in her life she wrote her mother
asking for five hundred dollars. Her mother sent back a
check with a rather nice letter saying that she'^d been made
Republican State Committeewoman and that she admired
Mary’s independence because she’d always believed women
had just as much right as men to earn their own living and
maybe women in politics would have a better influence
chan she’d once thought, and certainly Mary was showing
grit in carving out a career for herself, but she did hope
she’d soon come around to seeing that she could have
just as interesting a career if she’d come back to Colorado
Springs and occupy the social position her mother’s situ-
ation entitled her to. Ben was so delighted when he saw
the check he didn’t ask what Mary had got the money
for. ^Tive hundred bucks is just what I needed,” he said.
“I hadn’t wanted to tell you but they want me to lead a
strike over in Bayonne . . . rayonworkers .     . . you know,
the old munitionplants made over to make artificial silk.

. .   . It’s a tough town and the workers are so poor they
can’t pay their union dues .       .  . but they’ve got a fine
radical union over there. It’s important to get a foothold
in the new industries . . . that’s where the old sellout
organizations of the A. F. of L. are failing. . .      . Five hun-
dred bucks’ll take care of the printing bill.”
    ^^Oh, Ben, you are not rested yet. I’m so afraid they’ll
arrest you again.”
    He kissed her. ^^Nothing to worry about.”
    ^^But, Ben, I wanted you to get some clothes.”
    ^^This is a fine suit. What’s the matter with this suit?
Didn’t Uncle Sam give me this suit himself?        .  .  . Once
we get things going we’ll get you over to do publicity for
us . . , enlarge your knowledge of the clothing industry.

         446

1360
Ohj Mary, youVe a wonderful girl to have raised that
money.”
   That fall when Ada came back^ Mary moved out and
got herself a couple of small rooms on West Fourth Street
in the Village, so that Ben could have some place to go
when he came over to New York. That winter she worked
tremendously hard, still handling her old job and at the
same time doing publicity for the strikes Ben led in several
Jersey towns. “That’s nothing to how hard we’ll have to
work when we have soviets in America,” Ben would say
when she’d ask him didn’t he think they’d do better work

if they didn’t always try to do so many things at once.
    She never knew when Ben was going to turn up. Some-
times he’d be there every night for a week and sometimes
he would be away for a month and she’d only hear from
him through newsreleases about meetings, picketline^
broken up, injunctions fought in the courts. Once they de-
cided they’d get married and have a baby, but the com-
rades were calling for Ben to come and organize the
towns around Passaic and he said it would distract him
 from his work and that they were young and that there’d
be plenty of time for that sort of thing after the revo-

 lution. Now was the time to fight. Of course she could
 have the baby if she wanted to but it would spoil her use-

 fulness in the struggle for several months and he didn’t
 think this was the time for it. It was the first time they’d

 quarreled. She said he was heartless. He said they had to

 sacrifice their personal feelings for the workingclass, and
 stormed out of the house in a temper. In the end she had
 an abortion but she had to write her mother again for
 money to pay for it.
     She threw herself into her work for the strikecommittee
 harder than ever. Sometimes for weeks she only slept four

 or five hours a night. She took to smoking a great deal
 There was always a cigarette resting on a corner of her

 typewriter. The fine ash dropped into the pages as they

                                                                                 447

1361
"came from the multigraph machine. Whenever she could
be spared from the office she went around collecting money
from wealthy women, inducing prominent liberals to come
and get arrested on the picketline, coaxing articles out of
newspapermen, traveling around the country to find chari»
table people to go on bailbonds. The strikers, the men and
women and children on picketlines, in soupkitchens, being
 interviewed in the dreary front parlors of their homes
 stripped of furniture they hadn’t been able to make the
 last payment on, the buses full of scabs, the cops and
 deputies with sawedoJE shotguns guarding the tall palings
 of the silent enormouslyextended oblongs of the black-
 windowed millbuildings, passed in a sort of dreamy haze
 before her, like a show on the stage, in the middle of the
 continuous typing and multigraphing, the writing of let-

 ters and working up of petitions, the long grind of office-
 work that took up her days and nights.
     She and Ben had no life together at all any more. She
 thrilled to him the way the workers did at meetings when
 he’d come to the platform in a tumult of stamping and
 applause and talk to them with flushed cheeks and shining
 eyes talking clearly directly to each man and woman, en-
 couraging them, warning them, explaining the economic
 setup to them. The millgirls were all crazy about him.
 In spite of herself Mary French would get a sick feeling
 in the pit of her stomach at the way they looked at him
 and at the way some big buxom freshlooking woman
 would stop him sometimes in the hall outside the office
 and put her hand on his arm and make him pay attention
 to her. Mary working away at her desk with her tongue
 bitter and her mouth dry from too much smoking would
 look at her yellowstained fingers and push her untidy un-
 curled hair off her forehead and feel badlydressed and
 faded and unattractive. If he’d give her one smile just
 for her before he bawled her out before the whole office be-
 ausc the leaflets weren’t ready, she’d feel happy all day,

          448

1362
But mostly he seemed to have forgotten that theyM ever
been lovers.
   After the A. F. of L. officials from Washington in expen-
sive overcoats and silk mufflers who smoked twentyfivecent
cigars and spat on the floor of the office had taken the
strike out of Beffls hands and settled it, he came back to
the room on Fourth Street late one night just as Mary
was going to bed. His eyes were redrimmed from lack of
sleep and his cheeks were sunken and grey. ^^Oh, Ben,” she
said and burst out crying. He was cold and bitter and des-
perate. He sat for hours on the edge of her bed telling her
in a sharp monotonous voice about the sellout and the
wrangles between the leftwingers and the oldline socialists
and laborleaders, and how now that it was all over here
was his trial for contempt of court coming up.            feel so
bad about spending the workers^ money on my defense.

.  .  . I^d as soon go to jail as not . .         . but iFs the pre-
cedent. .   .  . WeVe got to fight every case and it^s the
one way we can use the liberal lawyers, the lousy fakers.

. . . And it costs so much and the union^s broke and I
don’t like to have them spend the money on me .      .  . but
they say that if we win my case then the cases against the
                                                           .”
other boys will all be dropped. . .           ^^The thing to do,”
she said, smoothing his hair off his forehead, ^hs to relax
a little.” ^^You should be telling me?” he said and started
to unlace his shoes.
     It was a long time before she could get him to get into
 bed. He sat there halfundressed in the dark shivering and
 talking about the errors that had been committed in the

 strike. When at last he’d taken his clothes off and stood
 up to lay them on a chair he looked like a skeleton in the
 broad swath of grey glare that cut across the room from
 the streetlight outside her window. She burst out crying

 all over again at the sunken look of his chest and the
 deep hollows inside his collarbone. ^^What’s' the matter,
 girl?” Ben said gruffly, ^^You crying because you haven’t

                                                                                449

1363
got a Valentino to go to bed with you^^” ^^Nonsense, Ben,

I was just thinking you needed fattening up           . .   . you
poor kid, you woik so hard.^^ “You’ll be going off with a
goodlookmg young bondsalesman one of these days, like
you were used to back in Colorado Springs. ... I know
what to expect ... I don’t give a damn ... I can make
the fight alone.” “Oh, Ben, don’t talk like that .          .  . you
know I’m heart and soul . . .” She drew him to her. Sud-
denly he kissed her.
    Next morning they quarreled bitterly while they were
dressing, about the value of her researchwork. She said
                                                  the strike hadn’t been such
that after all he couldn’t talk 5
a wild success. He went out without eating his breakfast.
She went uptown in a clenched fury of misery, threw up
her job and a few days later went down to Boston to
work on the Sacco-Vanzetti case with the new committee
that had just been formed.
    She’d never been in Boston before. The town these
sunny winter days had a redbrick oldtime steelengraving
look that pleased her. She got herself a little room on the
edge of the slums back of Beacon Hill and decided that
when the case was won, she’d write a novel about Boston.
She bought some school copybooks in a little musty sta-
tioners’ shop and started right away taking notes for the
novel. The smell of the new copybook with its faint blue
lines made her feel fresh and new. After this she’d observe
life. She’d never fall for a man again. Her mother had
sent her a check for Christmas. With that she bought her-
self some new clothes and quite a becoming hat. She started
to curl her hair again.
    Her job was keeping in touch with newspapermen and
trying lo get favorable items into the press. It was uphill
work. Although most of the newspapermen who had any
connection with the case thought the two had been wrongly
convicted they tended to say that they were just two wop
anarchists, so what the hell? After she’d been out to
         450

1364
Dedham jail to talk to Sacco and to Charlestown to talk
to Vanzettij she tried to tell the U.P. man what she felt
about them one Saturday night when he was taking her
out to dinner at an Italian restaurant on Hanover Stree *
    He was the only one of the newspapermen she got really
friendly with. He was an awful drunk but he^d seen a
great deal and he had a gentle detached manr:.r that she
liked.* He liked her for some reason, though he kidded her
unmercifully about what he called her youthful fanaticism.
When he’d ask her out to dinner and make her drink a
lot of red wine she’d tell herself that it wasn’t really a
waste of time, that it was important for her to keep in
touch with the press services. His name was Jerry Burn-
ham.
    ^^But, Jerry, how can you stand it? If the State of Mas-
sachusetts can kill those two innocent men in the face ot
the protest of the whole world it’ll mean that there never
will be any justice in America ever again.” “When was
there any to begin with?” he said with a mirthless giggle,
leaning over to fill up her glass. “Ever heard of Tom
Mooney?” The curly white of his hair gave a strangely
youthful look to his puffy red face. “But there’s something
                                                          you get such a feeling
so peaceful, so honest about them 3
of greatness out of them. Honestly they are great men.”
“Everything you say makes it more remarkable that they
weren’t executed years ago.” “But the workingpeople, the
common people, they won’t allow it.” “It’s the common
people who get most fun out of the torture and execution
of great men. ... If it’s not going too far back I’d like

to know who it was demanded the execution of our friend
Jesus H. Christ?”
     It was Jerry Burnham who taught her to drink. He
lived himself in a daily alcoholic haze carrying his drinks

carefully and circumspectly like an acrobat walking across

a tight wire with a tableful of dishes balanced on his head
 He was so used to working bis twentyfourhour newsserv

                                                                                451

1365
Ice that he attended to his wires and the business of his

office as casually as he^ pay the check in one speakeasy
before walking around the corner to another. His kidneys
were shot and he was on the winewagon he said, but she
often noticed whiskey on his breath when she went into
his office. He was so exasperating that she^d swear to her-
self each time she went out with him it was the last. No
more wasting time when every minute was precious. But
the next time he^d ask her out she’d crumple up at once
and smile and say yes and waste another evening drinking
wine and listening to him ramble on. “It’ll all end in
blindness and sudden death,” he said one night as he left
her in a taxi at the corner of her street. “But who cares'^
Who in hell cares  .  . .   ^^ Who on the bloody louseinfested
globe gives one little small microscopic vestigial hoot?”
   As courtdecision after courtdecision was lost and the ran-
cid Boston spring warmed into summer and the governor’s
commission reported adversely and no hope remained but
a pardon from the governor himself, Mary worked more
and more desperately hard. She wrote articles, she talked
to politicians and ministers and argued with editors, she
made speeches In unionhalls. She wrote her mother piti-
ful humiliating letters to get money out of her on all sorts
of pretexts. Every cent she could scrape up went Into the
work of her committee. There were always stationery and
stamps and telegrams and phonecalls to pay for. She spent
long evenings trying to coax communists, socialists, anar-
chists, liberals into working together. Hurrying along the
stonepaved streets she’d be whispering to herself, “They’ve
got to be saved, they’ve got to be saved.” When at last
she got to bed her dreams were full of impossible tasks 5
she was trying to glue a broken teapot together and as
soon as she got one side of it mended the other side would
come to pieces again, she was trying to mend a rent in her
skirt and by the time the bottom was sewed the top had
                                  she was trying to put together piec^
come undone again j
         452

1366
of a torn typewritten sheet, the telegram was of the great
est importance, she couldn^t see, it was all a blur before
her eyesj it was the evidence that would force a new
trial, her eyes were too bad, when she had spelled out
one word from the swollen throbbing letters she^d for-
gotten the last one; she was climbing a shaky hillside
among black guttedlooking houses pitching at crazy angles
where steelworkers lived, at each step she slid back, it was
too steep, she was crying for help, yelling, sliding back.
Then warm reassuring voices like Ben Compton^s when
he was feeling well were telling her that Public Opinion
wouldn^t allow it that after all Americans had a sense of
Justice and Fair Play that the Workingclass would rise;
she^d see crowded meetings, slogans, banners, gJary bill-
boards with letters pitching into perspective saying: Work-
ers of the World Unite, she^d be marching in the middle
of crowds in parades of protest. They Shall Not Die.
    She’d wake up with a start, bathe and dress hurriedly
and rush down to the office of the committee snatching up
a glass of orangejuice and a cup of coffee on the way. She
was always the first there; if she slackened her work for
a moment she’d see their faces, the shoemaker’s sharply-
modeled pale face with the flashing eyes and the fish-
peddler’s philosophical mustaches and his musing unscared
eyes. She’d see behind them the electric chair as clear as

if it were standing in front of her desk in the stuffy
crowded office.
    July went by all too fast. August came. A growing
crowd of all sorts of people began pouring through the

office, old friends, wobblies who’d hitchhiked from the

coast, politicians interested in the Italian vote, lawyers with
suggestions for the defense, writers, outcfwork newspaper-
men, cranks and phonies of all kinds attracted by rumors
of an enormous defensefund. She came back one afternoon
from speaking in a unionhall in Pawtucket and found
G. H. Barrow sitting at her desk. He had written a great

                                                                                453

1367
pile of personal telegrams to senators congressmen mini-

sters laborleaders demanding that they join in the protest

in the name of justice and civilization and the working-

class, long telegrams and cables at top rates. She figured
out the cost as she checked them off. She didn’t know how
the committee could pay for them, but she handed them
to the messengerboy waiting outside. She could hardly be-
lieve that those words had made her veins tingle only a
few weeks before. It shocked her to think how meaning-

less they seemed to her now like the little cards you get
from a onecent fortunetelling machine. For six months
now she’d been reading and writing the same words every
day.
    Mary didn’t have time to be embarrassed meeting
George Barrow. They went out together to get a plate of
soup at a cafeteria talking about nothing but the case as if
they’d never known each other before. Picketing the State
House had begun again and as they came out of the restau-
rant Mary turned to him and said, ^^Well, George, how
about going up and getting arrested. . . . There’s still
time to make the afternoon papers, Your name would give
us back the front page.”
    He flushed red, and stood there in front of the restau-
rant m the noontime crowd looking tall and nervous and
popeyed in his natty lightgrey suit. ^^But, my dear g-g-girl,
I ... if I thought it would do the slightest good I would
... I’d get myself arrested or run over by a truck . . .
but I think it would rob me of whatever usefulness I
might have.”
    Mary French looked him straight in the eye, her face
white with fury.         didn’t think you’d take the risk,” she
said, clipping each word off and spitting it in his face. She
turned her back on him and hurried to the office.
    It was a sort of relief when she was arrested herself.
She’d planned to keep out of sight of the cops as she
had been told her work was too valuable to lose, but she’d
        454

1368
had to run up the hill with a set of placards for a new
batch of picketers who had gone off without them.
There was nobody in the ofEce she could send. She was
just crossing Beacon Street when two large polite cops
suddenly appeared, one on each side of her. One of them
said, ^‘^Sorry, miss, please come quietly,” and she found
herself sitting in the dark patrolwagon. Driving to the
policestation she had a soothing sense of helplessness and
irresponsibility. It was the first time in weeks she had
felt herself relax. At the Joy Street station they booked
her but they didn’t put her in a cell. She sat on a bench
opposite the window with two Jewish garmentworkers and
a welldressed woman in a flowered summer dress with a
string of pearls round her neck and watched the men pick-
eters pouring through into the cells. The cops were polite,
everybody was jollyj it seemed like a kind of game, it
was hard to believe anything real was at stake.
    In a crowd that had just been unloaded from the wagon
on the steep street outside the policestation she caught
sight of a tall man she recognized as Donald Stevens from
his picture in the Dmly. A redfaced cop held on to each
of his arms. His shirt was torn open at the neck and his
necktie had a stringy look as if somebody had been yank-
ing on it. The first thing Mary thought was how hand-
somely he held himself. He had steelgrey hair and a
brown outdoorlooking skin and luminous grey eyes over
high cheekbones. When he was led away from the desk
she followed his broad shoulders with her eyes into the
gloom of the cells. The woman next to her whispered in
an awed voice that he was being held for inciting to riot
instead of sauntering and loitering like the rest. Five
thousand dollars bail. He had tried to hold a meeting on
Boston Common.
    Mary had been there about a halfhour when little Mr.
Feinstein from the office came round with a tall fashion-
ablydressed man in a linen suit who put up the bail for

                                                                               455

1369
her. At the same time Donald Stevens was bailed out.
The four of them walked down the hill from the police-

station together. At the corner the man in the linen suit

said, “You two were too useful to leave in there all day.

. . . Perhaps we’ll see you at the Bellevue . .        . suite D,
second floor.” Then he waved his hand and left them.
Mary was so anxious to talk to Donald Stevens she didn’t
think to ask the man’s name. Events were going past her
faster than she could focus her mind on them.
    Mary plucked at Donald Stevens’ sleeve, she and Mr.
Feinstein both had to hurry to keep up with his long
stnde. “Pm Mary French,” she said. “What can we do?

. . , We’ve got to do something.” He turned to her
with a broad smile as if he’d seen her for the first time.
“I’ve heard of you,” he said. “You’re a plucky little girl
        you’ve been putting up a real fight in spite of your
. . .
liberal committee.” “But they’ve done the best they
could,” she said.
    “We’ve got to get the entire workingclass of Boston
out on the streets,” said Stevens in his deep rattling voice.
    “We’ve gotten out the garmentworkers but that’s all.”
    He struck his open palm with his fist. “What about the
Italians'' What about the North End? Where’s your
office? Look what we did in New York. Why can’t you
do it here?” He leaned over towards her with a caressing
confidential manner. Right away the feeling of being tired
and harassed left her, without thinking she put her hand
on his arm. “We’ll go and talk to your committee} then
we’ll talk to the Italian committee. Then we’ll shake up
the unions.” “But, Don, we’ve only got thirty hours,” said
Mr. Feinstein In a dry tired voice. “I have more con-
fidence in political pressure being applied to the governor.
You know he has presidential aspirations. I think the gov-
ernor’s going to commute the sentences.”
    At the office Mary found Jerry Burnham waiting for
her. “Well, Joan of Arc,” he said, “I was just going
         456

1370
down to bail you out. But I see theyVe turned you loose.’’
Jerry and Donald Stevens had evidently known each other
before. “Well, Jerry/’ said Donald Stevens savagely,
^^doesn’t this shake you out of your cynical pose a little?”
         don’t see why it should. It’s nothing new to me that
collegepresidents are skunks.”
    Donald Stevens drew off against the wall as if he were
holding himself back from giving Jerry a punch in the
jaw.       can’t see how any man who has any manhood left
can help getting red .    . . even a pettybourgeois journal-
ist.”
    ^^My dear Don, you ought to know by this time that
we hocked our manhood for a brass check about the time
of the first world war . . . that is if we had any            .  . * I
suppose there’d be various opinions about that.” Donald
Stevens had already swung on into the inner office. Mary
found herself looking into Jerry’s reddening face, not
knowing what to say. ^^Well, Mary, if you have a need
for a pickup during the day ... I should think you
would need it .      . . I’ll be at the old stand.” ^Dh, I
won’t have time,” Mary said coldly. She could hear Don-
ald Stevens’ deep voice from the inner office. She hurried
on after him.
    The lawyers had failed. Talking, wrangling, arguing
about how a lastminute protest could be organized Mary
could feel the hours ebbing, the hours of these men’s lives.
She felt the minutes dripping away as actually as if they
were bleeding from her own wrists. She felt weak and

sick. She couldn’t think of anything. It was a relief to
be out in the street trotting to keep up with Donald Ste-
vens’ big stride. They made a round of the committees. It
was nearly noon, nothing was done. Down on Hanover
Street a palefaced Italian in a shabby Ford sedan hailed
them. Stevens opened the door of the car. ^^Comrade
French, this is Comrade Strozzi . . . he’s going to drive
m around.” “Are you a citizen?” she asked with an

                                                                                457

1371
anxious frown. Strozzi shook his head and smiled a thin-
lipped smile. ^^Maybe they give me a free trip back to
the Italy5” he said.
    Mary never remembered what they did the rest of the
day. They drove all over the poorer Boston suburbs. Often
the men they were looking for were out. A great deal of
the time she spent in phonebooths calling wrong numbers.
She couldn’t seem to do anything right. She looked with
numb st?4ng eyes out of eyelids that felt like sandpaper
at the iiien and women crowding into the office. Stevens
had lost the irritated stinging manner he’d had at first.
He argued with tradeuniori officials, socialists, ministers,
lawyers, with an aloof sarcastic coolness. ^^After all they
are brave men. It doesn’t matter whether they are saved
or not any more, it’s the power of the workingclass that’s
got to be saved,” he’d say. Everywhere there was the same
opinion. A demonstration will mean violence, will spoil the
chance that the governor will commute at the last moment.
Mary had lost all her initiative. Suddenly she’d become
Donald Stevens’ secretary. She was least unhappy when
she was running small errands for him.
    Late that night she went through all the Italian restau-
 rants on Hanover Street looking for an anarchist Stevens
 wanted to see. Every place was empty. There was a hush
over everything. Death watch. People kept away from
each other as if to avoid some contagion. At the back of
a room in a little upstairs speakeasy she saw Jerry Burn-
ham sitting alone at a table with a jigger of whiskey and
a bottle of gingerale in front of him. His face was white
as a napkin and he was teetering gently in his chair. He
stared at her without seeing her. The waiter was bending
over him shaking him. He was hopelessly drunk.
     It was a relief to run back to the office where Stevens
 w-s still trying to line up a general strike. He gave her
 a searching look when she came in. ^^Failed again,” she
 said bitterly. He put down the telephone receiver, got to
         458

1372
his feet, strode over to the line of hooks on the grimy-
yellow wall and got down his hat and coat. ^^Mary French,
you’re deadtired. I’m going to take you home.”
    They had to walk around several blocks to avoid the
cordon of police guarding the State House. ^^Ever played
tug of warf^” Don was saying. ^^You pull with all your
might but the other guys are heavier and you feel your-

self being dragged their way. You’re being pulled for-
ward faster than you’re pulling back. . .        . Don’t let me
talk like a defeatist,      .  .  . We’re not a couple of god-
damned liberals,” he said and burst into a dry laugh.
^‘Don’t you hate lawyers?” They were standing in front

of the bowfronted brick house where she had her room.
^^Goodnight, Don,” she said. ^^Goodnight, Mary, try and

sleep.”
    Monday was like another Sunday. She woke late. It

was an agony getting out of bed. It was a fight to put on

her clothes, to go down to the office and face the de-

 feated eyes. The people she met on the street seemed to

 look away from her when she passed them. Death watch.
 The streets were quiet, even the traffic seemed muffled as

 if the whole city were under the terror of dying that night.
 The day passed in a monotonous mumble of words, col-
 umns in newspapers, telephone calls. Death watch. That

 night she had a moment of fierce excitement when she

 and Don started for Charlestown to join the protest pa-

 rade. She hadn’t expected they’d be so many. Gusts of

 singing, scattered bars of the International burst and faded

 above the packed heads between the blank windows of the

 dingy houses. Death watch. On one side of her was a

 little man with eyeglasses who said he was a musicteacher,

  on the other a Jewish girl, a member of the Ladies’ FulL

 fashioned Hosiery Workers. They linked arms. Don was
  m the front rank, a little ahead. They were crossing the

 bridge. They were walking on cobbles on a badlylighted

                                                                                 459

1373
street under an elevated structure. Trains roared overhead,
‘^nly a few blocks from Charlestown jail/’ a voice yelled.
    This time the cops were using their clubs. There was
the clatter of the horses’ hoofs on the cobbles and the
whack thud whack thud of the clubs. And way off the
jangle jangle of patrolwagons. Mary was terribly scared.
A big truck was bearing down on her. She jumped to one
side out of the way behind one of the girder supports.
Two cops had hold of her. She clung to the grimy girder.
A cop was cracking her on the hand with his club. She
wasn’t much hurt, she was in a patrolwagon, she’d lost
her hat and her hair had come down. She caught herself
Thinking that she ought to have her hair bobbed if she
was going to do much of this sort of thing. “Anybody
know where Don Stevens is?” Don’s voice came a little
shakily from the blackness in front. “That you, Mary?”
“How are you, Don?” “O.K. Sure. A little battered round
the head an’ ears.” “He’s Weedin’ terrible,” came another
man’s voice. “Comrades, let’s sing,” Don’s voice shouted.
Mary forgot everything as her voice joined his voice, all
their voices, the voices of the crowds being driven back
across the bridge in singing:

                 Arise ye prisoners of sta/rvMon . . .




                                               NEWSREEL LXVI


                     HOLMES DENIES STAY
                            A better worWs in birth

        Tiny Wasps Imported From Korea In Battle To Death
^ith Asiatic Beetle

       BOY CARRIED MTLE DOWN SEWER J SHOT OUT ALIVE
         460

1374
                 CHICAGO BARS MEETINGS
                    For justice thunders condemnation

                  Washington Keeps Eye On Radicals

                          Arise rejected of the earth

     FARiS BRUSSELS MOSCOW GENEVA ADD THEIR VOICES

                         It is the final conflict
                             Let each stand in Jm flace

                     Geologist Lost In Cave Six Days

                            The International Party

            SACCO AND VANZETTI MUST DIE

                            Shall be the human race.

       Much I thought of you when I was lying in the death
house—the singings the kind tender voices of the children from
     'playground where there was all the life and the joy of lib-
erty—just one step from the wall tharc contains the buried
agony of three buried souls. It would remind me so often of
you and of your sister and I wish I could see you every mo-
menty but I feel better that you will not come to the death
house so that you could not see the horrible picture of three
living in agony wealing to be electrocuted.



                               THE CAMERA EYE (50)


        they have clubbed us off the streets              they are

stronger        they are rich        they hire and fire the poli-

ticians the newspapereditors the old judges the small men

with reputations the collegepresidents the wardheelers

(listen businessmen collegepresidents judges        America

                                                                               Af.61

1375
will not forget her betrayers) they hire the men with

guns the uniforms the policecars the patrolwagons

       all right you have won             you will kill the brave

men our friends tonight

       there is nothing left to do we are beaten we

the beaten crowd together in these old dingy school-

rooms on Salem Street shuffle up and down the gritty

creaking stairs sit hunched with bowed heads on benches

and hear the old words of the haters of oppression made

new in sweat and agony tonight

        our work is over the scribbled phrases the nighcs

typing releases the smell of the pnntshop the sharp reek

of newprinted leaflets the rush for Western Union

stringing words into wires the search for stinging words

to make you feel who are your oppressors America

       America our nation has been beaten by strangers who

have turned our language inside out who have taken the

clean words our fathers spoke and made them slimy and

foul

       their hired men sit on the judge^s bench they oil

back with their feet on the tables under the dome of the

State House they are ignorant of our beliefs they have the

dollars the guns the armed forces the powerplants

        they have built the electricchair and hired the execu-

tioner to throw the switch

        all right we are two nations

        America our nation has been beaten by strangers who

        462

1376
have bought the laws and fenced off the meadows and

cut down the woods for pulp and turned our pleasant

cities into slums and sweated the wealth out of our people
and when they want to they hire the executioner to throw

the switch

        but do they know that the old words of the immi-

grants are being renewed in blood and agony tonight do

they know that the old American speech of the haters of

oppression is new tonight in the mouth of an old woman
from Pittsburgh of a husky boilermaker from Frisco who
hopped freights clear from the Coast to come here in the

mouth of a Back Bay socialworker in the mouth of an

Italian printer of a hobo from Arkansas            the language

of the beaten nation is not forgotten in our ears tonight

        the men in the deathhouse made the old words new

before they died


        If it had not been for these things^ I might have

lived out my Ufe talking at streetcorners to s^ormng men.

I might have died unknowny unmarkedy a failure. This is

our career and our trkmfh. Never in our full life cm we

 hope to do such work for tolerancey for justicey for msf/s

understanding of man as how we do by cm accident


        now their work is over           the immigrants haters of

 oppression lie quiet in black suits in the little undertaking

parlor in the North End            the city is quiet the men of

                                                                                463

1377
tlie conquering nation are not to be seen on the streets

       they have won why are they scared to be seen on

the streets'^ on the streets you see only the downcast

faces of the beaten        the streets belong to the beaten

nation       all the way to the cemetery where the bodies

of the immigrants are to be burned we line the curbs in

the drizzling rain we crowd the wet sidewalks elbow to

elbow silent pale looking with scared eyes at the coffins

       we stand defeated America




                                             NEWSREEL LXVII


       when things are upset, there’s always chaos, said Mr,
^ord. Work can accomplish wonders and overcome chaotic
conditions. When the Russian masses will learn to want more
than they have, when they will want white collars, soap, better
clothes, better shoes, better housing, better living conditions

         / Vi]t uf my finder and I say tweet tweet
                                                            shush shush
                                                                now now
                                                                   come come

           REPUBLIC-TRUMBULL STEEL MERGER VOTED

                   There along the dreamy Amazon
                               We met ufon the shore
                   Tho^ the love I knew is ever gone

 WHEAT OVERSOLD REACHES NEW HIGH

                               Dreams linger on
        464

1378
        the first thing the volunteer firefighters did was to open
die windows to let the smoke out. This created a draft and the
fire with a good thirty mile wind right from the ocean did
the rest

    RECORD TURNOVER IN INSURANCE SHARES AS TRADING
                                          PROGRESSES

         outside the scene was a veritable bedlam. Well-dressed
women walked up and down wringing their hands, helpless to
save their belongings, while from the windows of the upper
stories there rained a shower of trunks, suitcases and clothing
hurled out indiscriminately. Jewelry and bncabrac valued at
thousands was picked up by the spectators from the lawn, who
thrust the objects under their coats and disappeared

                         BROKERS LOANS HIT NEW HIGH

                      Change all of your gray skies
                               Turn them into gay skies
             And keef sweeping the cobwebs off the moon

                                  MARKETS OPTIMISTIC

         learn new uses for cement. How to develop profitable
concrete business. How to judge materials. How to figure

jobs. How to reinforce concrete. How to build forms, roadsj
sidewalks, floors, foundations, culverts, cellars

             And even tho^ the Irish and the Dutch
                  Say it donh amount to much
                      Fifty million Frenchmen can^t he wrong

               STARSPANGLED BANDIT GANG
                                    ROBS DINERS
                 MURDER BARES QUAKER STATE FANTASIES

                                   Poker Slayer Praised

                             Poor little Hollywood Rose
                                          so all alone
                             No one in Hollywood knows
                                          how sad she^s grown

1379
FIVE HUNDRED MILLIONS IN BANK DEAL

Sure I love the dear stiver that shines in your hair
   And the brow thads all furrowed
       And wnnkled with care
           I kiss the dear fingers so toll worn for me

                 CARBONIC BUYS IN DRY ICE

          GAB MARATHON RUN FOR GOLD ON BROADWAY

        the broad advertising of the bull markets, the wide eX'
tension of the ticker services, the equipping of branch brokerage
offices with tickers, transparent, magnified translux stockquota-
tion rolls have had the natural result of stirring up nation-wide
interest in the stockmarket



                          POOR LITTLE RICH BOY


        William Randolph Hearst was an only son, the
only chick in the richlyfeathered nest of George and
Phebe Hearst.
        In eighteen fifty George Hearst had left his folks
and the farm in Franklin County, Missouri, and driven
a team of oxen out to California. (In fortynine the
sudden enormous flare of gold had filled the west 5
        the young men couldn’t keep their minds on their
plowing, on feeding the swill to the pigs, on threshing
the wheat
        when the fires of gold were sweeping the Pacific
Slope. Cholera followed in the ruts of the oxcarts, they
died of cholera round the campfires, in hastilybuilt
chinchinfested cabins, they were picked off by hostile
Indians, they blew each other’s heads off in brawls.)
         George Hearst was one of the few that made itj
         he developed a knack for placerminingj
         466

1380
        as a prospector he had an accurate eye for picking
a goldbearing vein of quartz j
        after seven years in El Dorado County he was a
millionaire, Anaconda was beginning, he owned one-
sixth of the Ophir Mine, he was in on Comstock
Lode.
        In sixtyone he went back home to Missouri with
his pockets full of nuggets and married Phebe Apper-
son and took her back by boat and across Panama to
San Francisco the new hilly capital of the millionaire
miners and bought a mansion for her beside the Golden
Gate on the huge fogbound coast of the Pacific.
        He owned vast ranges and ranches, raised cattle,
ran racehorses, prospected in Mexico, employed five
thousand men in his mines, on his estates, lost and won
fortunes in mining deals, played poker at a century a
chip, never went out without a bag of clinkers to hand
out to old friends down on their uppers,
         and died in Washington
         a senator,
         a rough diamond, a lusty beloved whitebearded
old man with the big beak and sparrowhawk eyes of a
breaker of trails, the beetling brows under the black
slouch hat
         of an oldtimer.



         Mrs. Hearst’s boy was born in sixtythree.
         Nothing too good for the only son.
         The Hearsts doted on their boy;
         the big lanky yoimgster grew up solemneyed and

selfwilled among servants and hired men, factotums,

overseers, hangerson, old pensioners; his grandparents

 spoiled him; he always did everything he wanted.
 Mrs. Hearst’s boy must have everything of the best.

                                                                                467

1381
        No lack of gold auggets, twentydollar goldpiecesj

big silver cartwheels.
                                                             he was too rich to
        The boy had few playmates j
get along with the others in the roughandtumble de-
mocracy of the boys growing up in San Francisco in

those days. He was too timid and too arrogant} he
wasn’t liked.
        His mother could always rent playmates with ice-
cream, imported candies, expensive toys, ponies, fire-
works always ready to set ofiF. The ones he could buy
he despised, he hankered always after the others.
        He was great on practical jokes and pulling the
                                      when the new Palace Hotel was
leg of the grownups j
opened with a reception for General Grant he and a
friend had themselves a time throwing down handfuls
of birdshot on the glass roof of the court to the con-
sternation. of the bigwigs and stuffedshirts below.



        Where^’er they went royally the Hearsts could
buy their way,
        up and down the California coast, through ranches
and miningtowns
        in Nevada and in Mexico,
        in tbe palace of Porfirio Diaz}
        the old man had lived in the world, had rubbed
shoulders with rich and poor, had knocked around in
miners’ hells, pushed his way through unblazed trails
with a packmule. All his life Mrs. Hearst’s boy was
to hanicer after that world
         bidden from him by a mist of millions}
         the boy had a bram, appetites, an imperious will,
         but he could never break away from the gilded
apronstringS}
         adventure became slumming.
          ^68

1382
        He was sent to boardingschool at St. Paul’s, in
Concord, New Hampshire. His pranks kept the school
in an uproar. He was fired.
        He tutored and went to Harvard
        where he cut quite a swath as businessmanager of
the Lamfoon, a brilliant entertainer} he didn’t drink
much himself, he was softspoken and silent} he got the
other boys drunk and paid the bills, bought the fire-
works to celebrate Cleveland’s election, hired the brass-
bands,
        bought the creampies to throw at the actors from
the box at the Old Howard,
        the cannon crackers to blow out the lamps of
herdic cabs with,
        the champagne for the chorines.
         He was rusticated and -finally fired from Harvard,
so the story goes, for sending to each of a number of
professors a chamberpot with the professor’s portrait
tastefully engraved on it.
         He went to New York. He was crazy about
newspapers. Already he’d been hanging around the
Boston newspaperoffices. In New York he was taken
by Pulitzer’s newfangled journalism. He didn’t want
to write} he wanted to be a newspaperman. (News-
papermen were part of that sharpcontoured world he
wanted to see clear, the reallife world he saw distorted
by a haze of millions, the ungraded lowlife world of
American Democracy.)
         Mrs. Hearst’s boy would be a newspaperman and
a Democrat. (Newspapermen saw heard ate drank
touched horsed kidded rubbed shoulders with real men,
whored} that was life.)


         He arrived home in California, a silent soft smil-
ing solemneyed young man
                                                                                469

1383
        dressed in the height of the London fashion.
        When his father asked him what he wanted to do
with his life,
        he said he wanted to run the Examiner which was
a moribund sheet in San Francisco which his father had
taken over for a bad debt. It didn’t seem much to ask.
The old man couldn’t imagine why Willie wanted the
old rag instead of a mine or a ranch, but Mrs. Hearst’s
boy always had his way.
         Young Hearst went down to the Exammer one
day
        and turned the office topsyturvy. He had a knack
for finding and using bright young men, he had a
knack for using his own prurient hanker after the lusts
and envies of plain unmonied lowlife men and women
 (the slummer sees only the streetwalkers, the dope-
parlors, the strip acts and goes back uptown saying he
                                                            the lowest common
knows the workingclass districts) j
denominator}
         manure to grow a career in,
         the rot of democracy. Out of it grew rankly an
empire of print. (Perhaps he liked to think of himself
as the young Caius Julius flinging his millions away,
tearing down emblems and traditions, making faces at
togaed privilege, monopoly, stuffedshirts in office}
         Caesar’s life like his was a millionaire prank. Per-
haps W. R. had read of republics ruined before}
         Alcibiades, too,, was a practical joker.)
         The San Francisco Examiner grew in circulation,
 tickled the prurient hankers of the moneyless man
         became The Monarch of the DaUies.


         When the old man died Mrs. Hearst sold out of
 Anaconda for seven and a half millions of dollars.
         4-70

1384
W. R. got the money from her to enter the New York
          he bought the NLorning Journal
field 5
        and started his race with the Pulitzers
        as to who should cash in most
        on the geewhizz emotion.
        In politics he was the people’s Democrat; he came
out for Bryan in nmetysix; on the Coast he fought the
Southern Pacific and the utilities and the railroad law-
yers who were grabbing the state of California away
from the first settlers; on election day in ninetysix his
three papers in New York put out between them more
than a million and a half copies, a record
         that forced the Worli to cut its price to a penny.


         When there’s no news make news.
         “You furnish the pictures and I’ll furnish the
war,” he’s supposed to have wired Remington in Ha-
vana. The trouble in Cuba was a goldmine for circu-
lation when Mark Hanna had settled national politics
by planting McKinley in the White House.
         Hearst had one of his bright young men engineer
a jailbreak for Evangelina Cisneros, a fair Cuban revo-

lutionist shoved into a dungeon by Weyler, and put on
a big reception for her in Madison Square.
         Remember the ^‘Maine”
         When McKinley was forced to declare war on
Spain W. R. had his plans all made to buy and sink a

British steamer in the Suez Canal
         but the Spanish fleet didn’t take that route.
         He hired the Sylvia and the Buccaneer and went
 down to Cuba himself with a portable press and a fleet

 ®f tugs
         and brandishing a sixshooter went in with the
 longboat through the surf and captured twentysix un-

                                                                                 471

1385
armed halfdrowned Spanish sailors on the beach and
forced them to kneel and kiss the American flag

        in front of the camera.
        Manila Bay raised the circulation of the Morning
Journal to
        one million six hundred thousand.



        When the Spaniards were licked there was nobody
left to heckle but the Mormons. Polygamy titillated
the straphangers, and the sexlife of the rich, and pen-
andmk drawings of women in underclothes and pre-
historic monsters in four colors. He discovered the
sobsister: Annie Laurie, Dorothy Dix, Beatrice Fairfax.
He splurged on comics, the Katzenjammer Kids, Buster
Brown, Krazy Kat. Get excited when the public is
excited,
        his editorials hammered at malefactors of great
wealth, trusts, the G.O.P., Mark Hanna and McKinley
so shrilly that when McKinley was assassinated most
Republicans In some way considered Hearst responsible
for his death.
         Hearst retorted by renaming the Morning Journal
the American
        and stepping into the limelight
         wearing a black frockcoat and a tengallon hat,
        presidential timber,
         the millionaire candidate of the common man.


         Bryan made him president of the National Asso-
ciation of Democratic Clubs and advised him to start a
paper in Chicago.
         After Bryan’s second defeat Hearst lined up with
Charles F. Murphy in New York and was elected to
Congress.

         472

1386
                                                                                        the
        His headquarters were at the Holland House j
night of his election he gave a big free show of fire-
works in Madison Square Garden} a mortar exploded
and killed or wounded something like a hundred peo-
ple} that was one piece of news the Hearst men made
that wasn’t spread on the front pages of the Hearst
papers.
        In the House of Representatives he was unpopu-
lar} it was schooldays over again. The limp hand-
shake, the solemn eyes set close to the long nose, the
small flabby scornful smile were out of place among
the Washington backslappers. He was ill at ease with-
out his hired gang around him.


         He was happier entertaining firstnighters and
footlight favorites at the Holland House. In those
years when Broadway still stopped at Fortysecond
Street,
         Millicent Willson was a dancer in The Girl from
Pans; she and her sister did a sister act together} she
won a popularity contest in the Mormng Telegrafh
         and the hand of
         William Randolph Hearst.



         In nineteen four he spent a lot of money putting
his name up in electric lights at the Chicago Conven-
tion to land the Democratic nomination but Judge
Parker and Wall Street got it away from him.
         In nineteen five he ran for Mayor of New York
on a municipalownership ticket.
         In mneteen six he very nearly got the governor-
 ship away from the solemnwhiskered Hughes. There
 were Hearst for President clubs all over the country,

                                                                                473

1387
He was making his way in politics spending millions to
the tune of Waltz Me Around, Again, Willie.
       He managed to get his competitor James Gordon
Bennett up in court for running indecent ads in the
New York Herald and fined $25,000, a feat which
hardly contributed to his popularity in certain quarters.
        In nineteen eight he was running revelations about
Standard Oil, the Archbold letters that proved that the
trusts were greasing the palms of the politicians in a
big way. He was the candidate of the Independence
party made up almost exclusively, so his enemies
claimed, of Hearst employees.
        (His fellowmillionaires felt he was a traitor to his
class but when he was taxed with his treason he an-
swered-
        You know I believe in -proferty, and you know
where I stand on personal fortunes, but isn’t it better
that I should represent in this country the dissatisfied
than have somebody else do it who might not have the
same real property relations that I may have?)

       By nineteen fourteen, although he was the greatest
newspaperowner in the country, the proprietor of hun-
dreds of square miles of ranching and mining country
in California and Mexico,
       his affairs were in such a scramble he had trouble
borrowing a milHon dollars,
       and politically he was ratpoison.


       All the millions he signed away
       all his skill at putting his own thoughts
       into the skull of the straphanger
       failed to bridge the tiny Rubicon between amateur
and professional politics (perhaps he could too easily
forget a disappointment buying a firstrate writer or an
       474

1388
embroidered slipper attributed to Charlemagne or the
gilded bed a king’s mistress was supposed to have
slept in).
        Sometimes he was high enough above the battle to
see clear. He threw all the power of his papers, all
his brilliance as a publisher into an effort to keep the
country sane and neutral during the first world warj
        he opposed loans to the Allies, seconded Bryan
in his lonely fight to keep the interests of the United
States as a whole paramount over the interests of the
Morgan banks and the anglophile businessmen of the
Eastj
         for his pains he was razzed as a pro-German,
        and when war was declared had detectives placed
among his butlers,
         secretserviceagents ransacking his private papers,
gumshoeing round his diningroom on Riverside Drive
to investigate rumors of strange colored lights seen in
his windows.
         He opposed the peace of Versailles and the league
of victorious nations
         and ended by proving that he was as patriotic as
anybody
        by coming out for conscription
         and printing his papers with red white and blue
borders and with little Amercian flags at either end of
the dateline and continually trying to stir up trouble
across the Rio Grande
         and inflating the Yankee Doodle bogey,
         the biggest navy in the world.



         The people of New York City backed him up by
electing Hearst’s candidate for Mayor, Honest John
Hylan,

                                                                                475

1389
                                                                                             ,




        but A1 Smith while he was still the sidewalks’ hero
rapped Hearst’s knuckles when he tried to climb back
onto the Democratic soundtruck,



        In spite of enormous expenditures on forged docu-
ments he failed to bring about war with Mexico.
        In spite of spraying hundreds of thousands of dol-
lars into moviestudios he failed to put over his favorite
moviestar as America’s sweetheart.
        And more and more the emperor of newsprint re-
tired to his fief of San Simeon on the Pacific Coast,
where he assembled a zoo, continued to dabble in
movingpictures, collected warehouses full of tapestries,
Mexican saddles, bricabrac, china, brocade, embroider}
old chests of drawers, tables and chairs, the loot of dead
Europe,
         built an Andalusian palace and a Moorish ban-
quethall and there spends his last years amid the re-
laxing adulations of screenstars, admen, screenwriters,
publicitymen, columnists, millionaire editors,
         a monarch of that new El Dorado
         where the warmedover daydreams of all the
ghettos
         are churned into an opiate haze
         more scarily blinding to the moneyless man
         more fruitful of millions
         than all the clinking multitude of double eagles
         the older Hearst minted out of El Dorado County
in the old days (the empire of the printed word con-
                                                                      but this power
tinues powerful by the inertia of bigness j
over the dreams
         of the adolescents of the world
         grows and poisons like a cancer),
         and out of the westcoast haze comes now and then
an old man’s querulous voice
         476

1390
        advocating the salestax,
        hissing dirty names at the defenders of civil lib-
erties for the workingman 5
        jail the reds,
        praising the comforts of Baden-Baden under the
blood and bludgeon rule of Handsome Adolph
(Hearst’s own loved invention, the lowest common
denominator come to power
         out of the rot of democracy)
         complaining about the California incometaxes,
         shrilling about the dangers of thought in the col-

leges.
         Deport, jail.



         Until he dies
         the magnificent endlesslyrolling presses will pour
 our print for him, the whirring everywhere projectors

 will spit images for him,
         a spent Caesar grown old with spending
          never man enough to cross the Rubicon.



      RICHARD ELLSWORTH SAVAGE


     Dick Savage walked down Lexington to the office m the

 Graybar Building. The December morning was sharp as

 steel, bright glints cut into his eyes, splintering from store-

  windows, from the glasses of people he passed on the

  street, from the chromium rims of the headlights of auto-

  mobiles. He wasn’t quite sure whether he had a hang-

  over or not. In a jeweler’s window he caught sight of his

  face in the glass against the black velvet backing, there

  was a puffy boiled look under the eyes like in the photo-

                                                                                 477

1391
graphs of the Prince of Wales. He felt sour and gone in
the middle like a rotten pear. He stepped into a drugstore
and ordered a bromoseltzer. At the sodafountain he stood
looking at himself in the mirror behind the glass shelf
                                                     his new darkblue broad-
with the gingeralebottles on it 3
cloth coat looked well anyway. The black eyes of the soda-
jerker were seeking his eyes out.        heavy evening, eh?”
Dick nodded and grinned. The sodajerker passed a thin
redknuckled hand over his patentleather hair. “I didn’t
get off tdl one thirty an’ it takes me an hour to get home
                                                                                  .”
on the subway. A whale of a chance I got to . . ^T’m
late at the office now,” said Dick and paid and walked out,
belching a little, into the sparkling morning street. He
walked fast, taking deep breaths. By the time he was stand-
ing in the elevator with a sprinkling of stoutish fortyish
welldressed men, executives like himself getting to their

offices late, he had a definite sharp headache.
    He’d hardly stretched his legs out under his desk when
the interoffice phone clicked. It was Miss Williams’ voice:
^^Good morning, Mr, Savage. We’ve been waiting for you

.  . . Mr. Moorehouse says please step into his office, he
wants to speak with you a minute before the staff confer-
ence.” Dick got up and stood a second with his lips pursed
rocking on the balls of his feet looking out the window
over the ashcolored blocks that stretched in a series of
castiron molds east to the chimneys of powerplants, the
bridge, the streak of river flashing back steel at the steel-
blue sky. Riveters shrilly clattered in the new huge con-
struction that was jutting up girder by girder at the corner
of Fortysecond. They all seemed inside his head like a
dentist’s drill. He shuddered, belphed and hurried along
the corridor into the large corner office.

    J. W. was staring at the ceiling with his big jowly face
 us expressionless as a cow’s. He turned his pale eyes on
 Dick without a smile. ^^Do you realize there are seventy-
 five million people in this country unwilling or unable tc

         478

1392
go to a physician in time of sickness Dick twisted his
face into a look of lively interest. He^s been talking to Ed
Griscolm, he said to himself. 'Those are the people the
Bingham products have got to serve. He’s touched only
the fringes of this great potential market” "His business
would be to make them feel they’re smarter than the big-
                                                                         W. frowned
bugs who go to Battle Creek ” said Dick. J.
thoughtfully.
    Ed Gnscolm had come in. He was a sallow long maiy
with an enthusiastic flash m his eye that flickered on and
off like an electriclight sign. He had a way of carrying his
arms like a cheerleader about to lead a college yell. Dick
said "Hello” without warmth. "Top of the morning,
Dick ... a bit overhung I see, ... Too bad, old man,
too bad.”
                                                W. went on in his slow even
    "I was just saying, Ed,” J.
voice, "that our talkingpoints should be first that they
haven’t scratched the top of their potential market of
seventyfive million people and second that a properlycon-
ducted campaign can eradicate the prejudice many people
feel against proprietary medicines and substitute a feeling
of pride in their use.”
    "It’s smart to be thrifty . . . that sort of thing,”
shouted Ed.
    "Selfmedication,” said Dick. "Tell them the average
sodajerker knows more about medicine today than the
family physician did twentyfive years ago,”
    "They think there’s something hick about patent medi-
eines,” yelled Ed Griscolm, "We got to put patent medi-
cines on Park Avenue.” "Proprietary medicines,” said
    W. reprovingly,
J.
    Dick managed to wipe the smile off his face. 'W/"e’ve
got to break the whole idea,” he said, "into its component
parts.”
                           W. picked up a carvedivory papercutter
    "Exactly.” J.
and looked at it in different angles in front of his face

                                                                               479

1393
The office was so silent they could hear the t'^affic roaring

j)utside and the wind whistling between the steel window-
frame and the steel window. Dick and Ed Griscolm held
                          W. began to talk. ^The American public
their breath. J.
has become sophisticated . . . when I was a boy in Pitts-
burgh all we thought of was display advertising, the ap-
peal to the eye. Now with the growth of sophistication
we must think of the other types of appeal, and the eradi-

cation of prejudice. . . , Bingo ... the name is out oi

date, ids all wrong. A man would be ashamed to lunch

at the Metropolitan Club with a bottle of Bingo at his

table . . . that must be the talkingpoint.        . . . Yesterday
Mr. Bingham seemed inclined to go ahead. He was balk-
ing a little at the cost of the campaign.      . .
    “Never mind,” screeched Ed Griscolm, “we’ll nail the
old buzzard’s feet down yet.”
    “I guess he has to be brought around gently just as
                                                    W.,” said Dick in a low
you were saying last night, J.
bland voice. “They tell me Halsey of Halsey O’Connor’s
gone to bed with a nervous breakdown tryin’ to get old
Bingham to make up his mind.” Ed Griscolm broke into
a tittering laugh.
         W. got to his feet with a faint smile. When W.
    J.                                                                              J.
smiled Dick smiled too. “I think he can be brought to
appreciate the advantages connected with the name . . .
dignity .    .  . established connections. .   .       Still talking

J. W. led the way down the hall into the large room with
a long oval mahogany table in the middle of It where the
                                                 W. went first with his con-
whole office was gathered. J.
siderable belly waggling a little from side to side as he
 walked, and Dick and Ed Griscolm, each with an armful
 of typewritten projects in paleblue covers, followed a step
 behind him. Just as they were settling down after a certain
                                                                      W. was begin-
 amount of coughing and honking and J.
 ning about how there were seventyfive million people, Ed
 Griscolm ran out and came back with a neatlydrawn chart
         480

1394
in blue and red and yellow lettering showing the layout
of the proposed campaign. An admiring murmur ran
round the table.
    Dick caught a triumphant glance in his direction from
                                                  W. out of the comer of his
Ed Griscolm. He looked at J.
            W. was looking at the chart with an expressionless
eye. J.
face. Dick walked over to Ed Griscolm and patted him
on the shoulder. “A swell job, Ed old man,” he whispered.
Ed Griscolm’s tense lips loosened into a smile. “Well,
gentlemen, what I’d like now is a snappy discussion,” said
      W. with a mean twinkle in his paleblue eye that
J.
 matched for a second the twinkle of the small diamonds

in his cufflinks.
     While the others talked Dick sat staring at J. W.’s
 hands spread out on the sheaf of typewritten papers on
 the table in front of him. Oldfashioned starched cuffs pro-
 truded from the sleeves of the perfectlyfitting double-
 breasted grey jacket and out of them hung two pudgy
 strangely hicklooking hands with liverspots on them. All
 through the discussion Dick stared at the hands, all the

 time writing down phrases on his scratchpad and scratching
 them out. He couldn’t think of anything. His brains felt

 boiled. He went on scratching away with his pencil at

 phrases that made no sense at all. On the fritz at the

 Ritz .    .  . Bingham’s products cure the fits.

      It was after one before the conference broke up. Every-
  body was congratulating Ed Griscolm on his layout. Dick

  heard his own voice saying it was wonderful but it needed
                                                                              W. “How
  a slightly different slant. “All right,” said J.
  about finding that slightly different slant over the week-

  end? That’s the idea I want to leave with every man here.

  I’m lunching with Mr. Bingham Monday noon. I must

  have a perfected project to present.”
      Dick Savage went back to his office and signed a pile of

  letters his secretary had left for him. Then he suddenly
   remembered he’d told Reggie Talbot he’d meet him for

                                                                                  481

1395
limch at ^^63” to meet the girlfriend and ran out, adjust-
ing his blue muffler as he went down in the elevator. He
caught sight of them at a table with their heads leaning
together in the crinkled cigarettesmoke in the back of the
crowded Saturdayafternoon speakeasy.         Dick, hello,”

said Reggie, jumping to his feet with his mild smile, grab-
bing Dick^s hand and drawing him towards the table.

didn^t wait for you at the office because I had to meet this

one. ... Jo, this is Mr. Savage. The only man in New
York who doesn^t give a damn. . . . What’ll you have to
drink The girl certainly was a knockout. When Dick

let himself drop on the redleather settee beside her, facing
Reggie’s slender ashblond head and his big inquiring light-
brown eyes, he felt boozy and tired.
    ^^Oh, Mr. Savage, what’s happened about the Bingham
account!^ I’m so excited about it. Reggie can’t talk about
anything else. I know it’s indiscreet to ask.” She looked
earnestly in his face out of longlashed black eyes. They
certainly made a pretty couple.
    ^^Telling tales out of school, eh?” said Dick, picking up
a breadstick and snapping it into his mouth.
    ^^But you know, Dick, Jo and me ... we talk about
everything ... it never goes any further.        ,  .  . And hon-
estly all the younger guys in the office think it’s a damn
shame J. W. didn’t use your first layout. . . . Griscolm

is going to lose the account for us if he isn’t careful .        .  .

it just don’t click. ... I think the old man’s getting soft-
ening of the brain.”
    “You know I’ve thought several times recently that
    W. wasn’t in very good health.    .
J.                                                        . . Too bad. He’s the
most brilliant figure in the publicrelations field.” Dick
heard an oily note come into his voice and felt ashamed
in front of the youngsters and shut up suddenly. “Say,
Tony,” he called peevishly to the waiter. “How about
some cocktails? Give me a bacardi with a little absinthe in
        482

1396
It, you know, ray special. . . . Gosh, I feel a hundred
years old.”
    ‘‘Been burning the candle at both ends?” asked Reggie,
    Dick twisted his face into a smirk. “Oh, that candle,”
he said. “It gives me a lot of trouble.” They all blushed
Dick chuckled. “By God, I don’t think there are threi
other people in the city that have a blush left in them.’
They ordered more cocktails. "'iVhile they were drinking
Dick felt the girl’s eyes serious and dark fixed on his face.
She lifted her glass to him. “Reggie says you’ve been aw-
fully sweet to him at the office. ... He says he’d have
been fired if it wasn’t for you.” “Who could help being
sweet to Reggie? Look at him.” Reggie got red as a
beet. “The lad’s got looks,” said the girl. “But has he
any brains?”
    Dick began to feel better with the onionsoup and the
third cocktail. He began to tell them how he envied them
being kids and getting married. He promised he’d be
bestman. When they asked him why he didn’t get mar-
ried himself he confusedly had some more drinks and said
his life was a shambles. He made fifteen thousand a year
but he never had any money. He knew a dozen beautiful
women but he never had a girl when he needed her. All
the time he was talking he was planning in the back of
his head a release on the need for freedom of selfmedi-
cation. He couldn’t stop thinking about that damned Bing-
ham account.
    It was beginning to get dark when they came out of
“63”. A feeling of envy stung him as he put the young
people into a taxi. He felt affectionate and amorous and
nicely buoyed up by the radiating warmth of food and
alcohol in his belly. He stood for a minute on the comer
of Madison Avenue watching the lively beforechristmas
crowd pour along the sidewalk against the bright show-
windows, all kinds of faces flushed and healthylooking for

                                                                               483

1397
once in the sharp cold evening in the slanting lights. Then
he took a taxi down to Twelfth Street.
   The colored maid who let him in was wearing a pretty
lace apron. ^^Hello, Cynthia.” ^^How do you do, Mr.
Dick.” Dick could feel the impatient blood pounding in
his temples as he walked up and down the old uneven par-
quet floor waiting. Eveline was smiling when she came
out from the back room. She’d put too much powder on
her face in too much of a hurry and it brought out the
drawn lines between her nostrils and her mouth and gave
her nose a floury look. Her voice still had a lovely swing
to it. ^^Dick, I thought you’d given me up.”
    ^^I’ve been working like a dog. .    .  . I’ve gotten so my
brain won’t work. I thought it would do me good to see
you.” She handed him a Chinese porcelain box with ciga-
rettes in it. They sat down side by side on a rickety old-
fashioned horsehair sofa. ^^How’s Jeremy?” asked Dick in
a cheerful tone.
    Her voice went flat. ^^He’s gone out west with Paul for
Cliristmas.”
    ^Tou must miss him . . . I’m disappointed myself. I
love the brat.”
    “Paul and I have finally decided to get a divorce . . .
in a friendly way.”
    “Eveline, I’m sorry.”
    “Why?”
    “I dunno. ... It does seem silly. . . . But I always
liked Paul.”
    “It all got just too tiresome. , . . This way it’ll be
much better for him.”
    There was something coolly bitter about her as she sat
beside him in her a little too frizzy afternoondress. He
felt as if he was meeting her for the first time. He picked
up her long blueveined hand and put it on the little table
in front of them and patted it. “I like you better .                . .
anyway.” It sounded phony in his ears, like something
        484

1398
iie^d say to a client. He jumped to his feet. ^^Say, Eveline^
suppose I call up Settignano and get some gin around?
IVe got to have a drink. ... I can’t get the ofEce out
of my head.”

    ^‘^If you go back to the icebox you’ll find some perfectl)
lovely cocktails all mixed. I just made them. There are
some people coming in later.” “How much later?” “About
seven o’clock .   .  . why?” Her eyes followed him teas-
ingly as he went back through the glass doors.
    In the pantry the colored girl was putting on her hat
“Cynthia, Mrs. Johnson alleges there are cocktails om
here.” “Yes, Mr, Dick, I’ll get you some glasses.” “Is
this your afternoon out?” “Yessir, I’m goin’ to church.”
“On Saturday afternoon?” “Yessir, our church we have
services every Saturday afternoon .  .  . lots of folks don’t
get Sunday off nowadays.” “It’s gotten so I don’t get
any day off at all.” “It shoa is too bad, Mr. Dick.”
    He went back into the front room shakily, carrying the
tray with the shaker jiggling on it. The two glasses clinked.
“Oh, Dick, I’m going to have to reform you. Your hands
are shaking like an old greybeard’s.” “Well, I am an old
greybeard. I’m worrying myself to death about whether
that bastardly patentmedicine king will sign on the dotted
line Monday.”
    “Don’t talk about it. . .          . It sounds just too awful
I’ve been working hard myself .     . . I’m trying to put on
a play.”
    “Eveline, that’s swells Who’s it by?”
    “Charles Edward Holden.         . . . It’s a magnificent
piece of work. I’m terribly excited about it. I think I know
how to do it. ... I don’t suppose you want to put a
couple of thousand dollars in, do you, Dick?”
    “Eveline, I’m flat broke. . . . They’ve got my salarj
garnisheed and Mother has to be supported in the style

to which she is accustomed and then there’s Brother
Henry’s ranch in Arizona . . . he’s all balled up with a

                                                                                485

1399
mortgage. ... I thought Charles Edward Holden was
just a columnist.^’
    ^^his is a side of him that^s never come out. ... I
think he’s the real poet of modern New York .           . . you
wait and see.”
    Dick poured himself another cocktail. ^Det’s talk about
just us for a minute. ... I feel so frazzled.                .  .  . Oh,
Eveline, you know what I mean. .      . . We’ve been prett)
good friends.” She let him hold her hand but she did not
return the squeeze he gave it. “You know we always said
we were just physically attractive to each other    .  . . why
isn’t that the swellest thing in the world?” He moved up
close to her on the couch, gave her a little kiss on th^
cheek, tried to twist her face around. “Don’t you like thij
miserable sinner a little bit?”
    “Dick, I can’t.” She got to her feet. Her lips wer^
twitching and she looked as if she was going to burst into
tears. “There’s somebody I like very much          . . . very^
very much. IVe decided to make some sense out of mv
life.”
    “Who? That damn columnist?”
    “Never mind who.”
    Dick buried his face in his hands. When he took hi!»
hands away he was laughing. “Well, if that isn’t just my
luck, . . . Just Johnny on the spot and me full of speak-
easy Saturdayafternoon amorosity.’^
    “Well, Dick, I’m sure you won’t lack for partners.’^
    “I do today. ... I feel lonely and hellish. My life is
5t shambles.”
   “What a literary phrase.”
    “I thought^ it was pretty good myself but honestly I
feel every whichway.   . . . Something funny happened to
me last night. I’ll tell you about it someday when you like
me better.”
    “Diek, why don’t you go to Eleanor’s? She’s giving a
party for all the boyars.”
        48d

1400
   “Is she really going to marry that horrid little prince?”
Eveline nodded with that same cold bitter look in her
eyes. “I suppose a title is the last word in the decorating
business. . . . Why won’t Eleanor put up some money?”
“I don’t want to ask her. She’s filthy with money, though,
she’s had a very successful fall. I guess we’re all getting
grasping in our old age. . . . What does poor Moore-
house think about the prince''”
    “I wish I knew what he thought about anything. I’ve
been working for him for years now and I don’t know
whether he’s a genius or a stuffed shirt. ... I wonder if

he’s going to be at Eleanor’s. I want to get hold of him
this evening for a moment.    . . . That’s a very good idea.

 . . . Eveline, you always do me good one way or an-
 other.”
     “You’d better not go without phoning. .      .  . She’s per-

 fectly capable of not letting you in if you come uninvited
 and particularly with a houseful of emigr6e Russians in

 tiaras.”
     Dick went to the phone and called up. He had to wait

 a long time for Eleanor to come. Her voice sounded shrill
 and rasping. At first she said why didn’t he come to din-

 ner next week instead. Dick’s voice got very coaxing.
 “Please let me see the famous prince, Eleanor. . .  And
 I’ve got something very important to ask you about. . .       ,

 After all you’ve always been my guardian angel, Eleanor.,

  If I can’t come to you when I’m in trouble, who can L
  come to''” At last she loosened up and said he could come
                                                                                     Ward
  but he mustn’t stay long. “You can talk to poor J.
  ... he looks a little forlorn.” Her voice ended in a

  screechy laugh that made the receiver jangle and hurt his

  car.
      When he went back to the sofa Eveline was lying back

   against the pillows soundlessly laughing. “Dick,” she said,

   “you’re a master of blarney.” Dick made a face at her,

   kissed her on the forehead and left the house.

                                                                                  487

1401
    Eleanor^s place was glittering with chandeliers and cut-

glass. When she met him at the drawingroom door her
small narrow face looked smooth and breakable as a piece
of porcelain under her carefullycurled hair and above a
big rhinestone brooch that held a lace collar together.
From behind her came the boom and the high piping of
Russian men^s and women’s voices and a smell of tea and
charcoal. ^Well, Richard, here you are,” she said in a rapid
hissing whisper. ^^Don’t forget to kiss the grandduchess’s
hand . . . she’s had such a dreadful life. You’d like to do
any little thing that would please her, wouldn’t you?      .  .  .
And, Richard, I’m worried about Ward ... he looks so
terribly tired ... I hope he isn’t beginning to break up.
He’s the type you know that goes off like that. ... You
know these big shortnecked blonds.”
    There was a tall silver samovar on the Buhl table in
front of the marble fireplace and beside it sat a large oldish
woman in a tinsel shawl with her hair m a pompadour and
the powder flaking off a tired blotchy face. She was very*
gracious and had quite a twinkle in her eye and she was
piling caviar out of a heaped cutglass bowl onto a slice of
blackbread and laughing with her mouth full. Around her
were grouped Russians in all stages of age and decay, some
in tunics and some in cheap business suits and some frowsty-
looking young women and a pair of young men with slick
hair and choirboy faces. They were all drinking tea or little
glasses of vodka. Everybody was ladling out caviar. Dick
was introduced to the prince who was an olivefaced young
man with black brows and a little pointed black mustache
who wore a black tunic and black soft leather boots and
had a prodigiously small waist. They were all merry as
crickets chirping and roaring in Russian, French and Eng-
lish. Eleanor sure is putting out, Dick caught himself
thinking as he dug into the mass of big greygrained caviar.
         W. looking pale and fagged was standing in the cor-
    J.
 ner of the room with his back to an icon that had three
         488

1402
candles burning in front of it. Dick distinctly remembered
ha\nng seen the icon in Eleanor^s window some weeks be-
                                                                    W. was talking
fore, against a piece of purple brocade. J,
to an ecclesiastic in a black cassock with purple trimmings
who when Dick went up to them turned out to have a rich
Irish brogue. ^^Meet the Archimandrite O’Donnell, Dick,”
              W. “Did I get it right?” The Archimandrite
said J.
grinned and nodded. “He’s been telling me about the
monasteries in Greece.” “You mean where they haul you
up in a basket?” said Dick. The Archimandrite jiggled his
grinning, looselipped face up and down. “I’m goin’ to have
the honorr and pleasurr of introducin’ dear Eleanor into
the mysteries of the true church. I was tellin’ Mr. Moore-
house the story of my conversion.” Dick found an impu-
dent rolling eye looking him over. “Perhaps you’d be
carin’ to come someday, Mr. Savage, to hear our choir.
Unbelief dissolves in music like a lump of sugar in a glass
                                                                                 W.
of hot tay.” “Yes, I like the Russian choir,” said J.
    “Don’t you think that our dear Eleanor looks happier
and younger for it?” The Archimandrite was beaming into
                                       W. nodded doubtfully. “Och, a
the crowded room. J.
lovely graceful little thing she is, clever too. .          .  . Per-
haps, Mr. Moorehouse and Mr. Savage, you’d come to the
service and to lunch with me afterwards. ... I have
some ideas about a little book on my experiences at Mount
Athos. . . . We could make a little parity of it.” Dick
was amazed to find the Archimandrite’s fingers pinching
him in the seat and hastily moved away a step, but not be-
fore he’d caught from the Archimandrite’s left eye a slow
 vigorous wink.
     The big room was full- of clinking and toasting, and
 there was the occasional crash of a broken glass. A group
 of younger Russians were singing in deep roaring voices

 that made the crystal chandelier tinkle over their heads,
 The caviar was all gone but two uniformed maids wen
                                                                                489

1403
cringing in a table set with horsdceuvres in the middle ol
which was a large boiled salmon.
        W, nudged Dick. “I think we might go someplace
   J,
                                                                                     W. I
where we can talk.” “I was just waiting for you, J.
Aink I’ve got a new slant. I think it’ll click this time.”
   They’d just managed to make their way through the
crush to the door when a Russian girl in black with fine
black eyes and arched brows came running after them.
“Oh, you mustn’t go. Leocadla Pavlovna likes you so
much. She likes it here, it is informal . . . the boheme.
That is what we like about Leonora Ivanovna. She is
boheme and we are boheme. We luff her.” “Fm afraid we
                                                               W. solemnly. The
have a business appointment,” said J.
Russian girl snapped her fingers with, “Oh, business it is
disgusting. . . . America would be so nice without the
business.”
                                                                W. sighed. “Poor
    When they got out on the street J.
Eleanor, Pm afraid she’s in for something. .         . . Those
Russians will eat her out of house and home. Do you sup-
pose she really will marry this Prince Mingraziali? I’ve
made inquiries about him. . ,    . He’s all that he says he is.
But heavens'” “With crowns and everything,” said Dick,
“the date’s all set.” “After all, Eleanor knows her own
business. She’s been very successful, you know.”

    J. W.’s car was at the door. The chauffeur got out with
a laprobe over his arm and was just about to close the door
on J. W. when Dick said, “J. W., have you a few minutes
to talk about this Bingham account.?” “Of course, I was
                                W. in a tired voice. “Come on out to
forgetting,” said J.
supper at Great Neck. . . . I’m alone out there except for
the children.” Smiling, Dick jumped in and the chauffeur
closed the door of the big black towttcar behind him.
    It was pretty lugubrious eating in the diningroom with
its painted Italian panels at the Moorehouses’ with the
butler and the secondman moving around silently in the
                                                   W. and Miss Simpson, the
dim light and only Dick and J.
         490

1404
children’s so very refined longfaced governess, at the long
candlelit table. Afterwards when they went into J. W.’s
little white den to smoke and talk about the Bingham ac-
count, Dick thanked his stars when the old butler appeared
with a bottle of scotch and ice and glasses. ^^Where did you
                                                      W. ^^Been in the cellai
find that, Thompson?” asked J.
since before the war, sir . . . those cases Mrs. Moore-^
house bought in Scotland. ... I knew Mr. Savage liked
a bit of a spot.”
    Dick laughed. ^^That’s the advantage of having a bad
name,” he said.
        W. drawled solemnly, ^Tt’s the best to be had, I know
    J.
that. . . . Do you know I never could get much out of
drinking, so I gave it up, even before prohibition.”
        W. had lit himself a cigar. Suddenly he threw it in
    J.
the fire.      don’t think I’ll smoke tonight. The doctor says
three cigars a day won’t hurt me . . . but I’ve been feel-
ing seedy all week. ... I ought to get out of the stock-
market. ... I hope you keep out of it, Dick.”
    ^‘My creditors don’t leave me enough to buy a ticket to
a raffle with.”
        W. took a couple of steps across the small room lined
    J.
with unscratched sets of the leading authors in morocco,
and then stood with his back to the Florentine fireplace
with his hands behind him.         feel chilly all the time. I
don^t think my circulation’s very good. .        .  . Perhaps it
was going to see Gertrude.  , . . The doctors have finally
admitted her case is hopeless. It was a great shock to me.”
    Dick got to his feet and put down his glass. ^T’m sorry,
    W. . . . Still, there have been surprising cures in brain
J.
troubles.”
        W. was standing with his lips in a thin tight line, his
    J.
big jowl trembling a little. ^‘Not in schizophrenia.           . . .

I’ve managed to do pretty well in everything except that.

 . . . I’m a lonely man,” he said. ^^And to think once upon
a time I was planning to be a songwriter.” He smiled.

                                                                                491

1405
Dick smiled too and held out his hand “Shake hands,

J. W.,” he said, “with the rums of a minor poet.”
    “Anyway,” said J. W., “the children will have the ad-
vantages I never had. .    .  . Would it bore you, before we
get down to business, to go up and say goodnight to them ?

I’d like to have you see them.”
    “Of course not, I love kids,” said Dick. “In fact I’ve
never yet quite managed to grow up myself.”
    At the head of the stairs Miss Simpson met them with
her finger to her lips. “Little Gertrude’s asleep.” They tip-
toed down the allwhite hall. The children were in bed
each in a small hospitallike room cold from an open win-
dow, on each pillow was a head of pale strawcolored hair.
                                                                                         W.
“Staple’s the oldest .     . . he’s twelve,” whispered J.
“Then Gertrude, then Johnny.” Staple said goodnight po-
litely. Gertrude didn’t wake up when they turned the
light on. Johnny sat up in a nightmare with his bright blue
eyes open wide, crying, “No, no,” in a tiny frightened
              W. sat on the edge of the bed petting him for a
Voice. J.
moment until he fell asleep again. “Goodnight, Miss
Simpson,” and they were tiptoeing down the stairs. “What
                                           W. turned beaming to Dick.
do you think of them?” J.
    “They sure are a pretty sight. ... I envy you,” said
Dick.
    “I’m glad I brought you out . . . I’d have been lonel)-
                                                                                W.
without you ... I must entertain more,” said J.
    They settled back into their chairs by the fire and started
to go over the layout to be presented to Bingham Products.
                                               W. began to yawn. Dick
When the clock struck ten J.                                           got
to his feet. “J. W., do you want my honest opinion?”
    “Go ahead, boy, you know you can say anything you
like to me.”
    “Well, here it is.” Dick tossed off the last warm weak
remnant of his scotch. ^‘I think we can’t see the woods for
the trees . . . we’re balled up in a mass of petty detail.
You say the old gentleman’s pretty pigheaded . . . one
        4-92

1406
of these from newsboy to president characters. . . . Well,
I don^t think that this stuff really sets in high enough re-
lief the campaign you outlined to us a month ago.  .  . .”
    ^^Pm not very well satisfied with it, to tell the truth.”
    ^^Is there a typewriter in the house
    “I guess Thompson or Morton can scrape one up some-
where.”
    “Well, I think that I might be able to bring your funda-
mental idea out a little more. To my mind it^s one of the
biggest ideas ever presented in the business world.”
    “Of course iPs the work of the whole office.”
    “Let me see if I can take this to pieces and put it (to-
gether again over the weekend. After all there^ll be noth-
ing lost.   . .   . WeVe got to blow that old gent clean out
of the water or else Halsey’ll get him.”
    “TheyTe around him every minute like a pack of
wolves,” said J. W., getting up yawning. “Well, I leave
                                                                            W. paused
It in your hands.” When he got to the door J.
and turned. “Of course those Russian aristocrats are so-
cially the top. IPs a big thing for Eleanor that way.        .  . .
But I wish she wouldn^t do it. ... You know, Dick,
Eleanor and I have had a very beautiful relationship. .    . .
That little woman’s advice and sympathy have meant a
great deal to me. ... I wish she wasn’t going to do it.

.  .  . Well, I’m going to bed.”
    Dick went up to the big bedroom hung with English
huntingscenes. Thompson brought him up a new noiseless
typewriter and the bottle of whiskey. Dick sat there work-
ing all night in his pyjamas and bathrobe smoking and
drinking the whiskey. He was still at it when the windows
began to get blue with day and he began to make out be-
tween the heavy curtains black lacy masses of sleetladen

trees grouped round a sodden lawn. His mouth was sour
from too many cigarettes. He went into the bathroom

frescoed with dolphins and began to whistle as he let the

                                                                               493

1407
fiot water pour into tiie tub. He felt bleary and dizzy bur
he had a new layout.
                                                 W. came back from church
    Next day at noon when J.
with the children Dick was dressed and shaved and walk-
ing up and down the flagged terrace in the raw air. Dick^s
                                                                           W. was de-
eyes felt hollow and his head throbbed but J.
lighted with the work.             course selfservice, independ-
ence, individualism is the word I gave the boys In the be-
ginning. This IS going to be more than a publicity cam-
paign, It’s going to be a campaign for Americanism. . . .

A.fter lunch I’ll send the car over for Miss Williams and
get her to take some dictation. There’s more meat in this
yet, Dick.” ^Df course,” said Dick, reddening. ^^All I’ve
                                                                     W.”
done is restore your original conception, J.
    At lunch the children sat up at the table and Dick had a
good time with them, making them talk to him and tell-
ing them stories about the bunnies he’d raised when he was
a little boy in Jersey. J. W. was beaming. After lunch Dick
played pingpong In the billiardroom in the basement with
Miss Simpson and Staple and little Gertrude while Johnny
                                                     W. retired to his den to
picked up the balls for them. J.
take a nap.
   Later they arranged the prospectus for Miss Williams
to type. The three of them were working there happily in
front of the fire when Thompson appeared in the door and
asked reverently if Mr. Moorehouse cared to take a
phonecall from Mr. Griscolm. ^^All right, give it to me
                                               W.
on this phone here,” said J.
    Dick froze in his chair. He could hear the voice at the
other end of the line twanging excitedly. ^^Ed, don’t you
                  W. was drawling. ^Wou take a good rest, my
Worry,” J.
boy, and be fresh as a daisy in the morning so that you
can pick holes in the final draft that Miss Williams and I
were working over all last night. A few changes occurred
to me in the night. ... You know sleep brings council.

. . . How about a little handball this afternoon? A sweat’s

        4.94.

1408
a great thing for a man, you know. If it wasn’t so wet Fd
be putting m eighteen holes of golf myself. All right, see
                                                 W. put down the receiver.
you in the morning, Ed.” J.
        you know, Dick,” he said, think Ed Griscolm ought
to take a couple of weeks off in Nassau or some place like
that. He^s losing his grip a little. ... I think I’ll sug-
gest it to him. He’s been a very valuable fellow in the
office, you know.”
    ^^One of the brightest men in the publicrelations field,”
said Dick flatly. They went back to work.
                                                               W. but stopped off
    Next morning Dick drove in with J.
on Fiftyseventh to run round to his mother’s apartment on
Fiftysixth to change his shirt. When he got to the office the
switchboard operator in the lobby gave him a broad grin.
Everything was humming with the Bingham account. In
the vestibule he ran into the inevitable Miss Williams. Her
sour lined oldmaidish face was twisted into a sugary smile.
^^Mr. Savage, Mr. Moorehouse says would you mind
meeting him and Mr. Bingham at the Plaza at twelve
thirty when he takes Mr. Bingham to lunch?”
    He spent the morning on routine work. Round eleven
Eveline Johnson called him up and said she wanted to see
him. He said how about towards the end of the week. ^^But
Pm right in the building,” she said in a hurt voice. ^^Oh,
come on up, but I’m pretty busy. . * . You know Mon-
days,”
    Eveline had a look of strain in the bright hard light
that poured in the window from the overcast sky. She had
on a grey coat with a furcollar that looked a little shabby
and a prickly grey straw hat that fitted her head tight and
had a kind of a last year’s look. The lines from the flanges

of her nose to the ends of her mouth looked deeper and
harder than ever, Dick got up and took both her hands.

^^Eyeline, you look tired.”
         think I’m coming down with the grippe.” She talked

fast.       just came in to see a friendly face, I have an ap-

                                                                                495

1409
                                   W. at eleven fifteen. . .
pointment to see J.                                                . Do you
think he’ll come across? If I can raise ten thousand the
Shuberts will raise the rest. But it’s got to be right away
because somebody has some kind of an option on it that
expires tomorrow. . . . Oh;, I’m so sick of not doing any-
thing. . .     . Holden has wonderful ideas about the pro-
duction and he’s letting me do the sets and costumes  . .
and if some Broadway producer does it he’ll ruin it. . . e
Dick, I know it’s a great play.”
    Dick frowned, ^^This isn’t such a very good time   .
we’re all pretty preoccupied this morning.”
    ^^Well, I won’t disturb you any more.” They were
standing in the window. “How can you stand those riveters
going all the time?”
    “Why, Eveline, those riveters are music to our ears,
they make us sing like canaries in a thunderstorm. They
                                          W. takes my advice that’s where
mean business. ... If J.
we’re going to have our new office.”
    “Well, goodby.” She put her hand in its worn grey
glove in his. “I know you’ll put in a word for me. . . .
You’re the whitehaired boy around here.”
    She went out leaving a little frail familiar scent of co-
logne and furs in the office. Dick walked up and down in
front of his desk frowning. He suddenly felt nervous and
jumpy. He decided he’d run out to get a breath of air and
maybe a small drink before he went to lunch. “If anybody
calls,” he said to his secretary, “tell them to call me after
three. I have an errand and then an appointment with Mr.
Moorehouse.”
    In the elevator there was J. W. just going down in a
new overcoat with a big furcollar and a new grey fedora.
^^Dick,” he said, ^fif you’re late at the Plaza I’ll wring your
neck. . .   . You’re slated for the blind bowboy,”
    “To shoot Bingham in the heart?” Dick’s ears hummed
as the elevator dropped.

   J. W, nodded, smiling, “By the way, in strict confidence
       '496

1410
what do you think of Mrs. Johnson^s project to put on a
play? ... Of course she^s a very lovely woman.             .  . .
She used to be a great friend of Eleanor’s.   . .  . Dick, my
boy, why don’t you marry?”
    “Who? Eveline? She’s married already.”
    “I was thinking aloud, don’t pay any attention to it”
They came out of the elevator and walked across the
Grand Central together in the swirl of the noontime
crowd. The sun had come out and sent long slanting mote-
filled rays across under the great blue ceiling overhead.
“But what do you think of this play venture? You see I’m
pretty well tied up in the market, ... I suppose I could
borrow the money at the bank.”
    “The theater’s always risky,” said Dick. “Eveline’s a
great girl and all that and full of talent but I don’t know
how much of a head she has for business. Putting on a
play’s a risky business.”
    “I like to help old friends out . .          . but it occurred to
me that if the Shuberts thought there was money in it
they’d be putting it in themselves. ... Of course Mrs<
Johnson’s very artistic.”
    “Of course^” said Dick.
                                                                    W. in the lobby
    At twelve thirty he was waiting for J.
of the Plaza chewing sensen to take the smell of the three
whiskeys he’d swallowed at Tony’s on the way up off his
breath. At twelve fortyfive he saw coming from the check-
room J. W.’s large pearshaped figure with the paleblue
eyes and the sleek strawgrey hair, and beside him a tall
gaunt man with untidy white hair curling into ducktaila
over his ears. The minute they stepped into the lobby Dick
began to hear a rasping opinionated boom from the tall
man.

         . . never one of those who could hold my peace
while injustice ruled in the marketplace. It has been a long
 struggle and one which from the vantage of those three-

 score and ten years that the prophets of old promised to

                                                                                497

1411
man upon this earth I can admit to have been largely
downed with material and spiritual success. Perhaps it waa
my early training for the pulpit but I have always felt, and
that feeling, Mr. Moorehouse, is not rare among the
prominent businessmen in this country, that material suc-

cess is not the only thing . . . there is the attainment of
the spirit of service. That is why I say to you frankly that

I have been grieved and wounded by this dark conspiracy.
Who steals my purse steals trash but who would , .            .
what is it? ... my memory’s not what it was . . . my
good name . . . Ah, yes, how do you do, Mr. Savage?”
   Dick was surprised by the wrench the handshake gave
his arm. He found himself standing in front of a gaunt
loose] ointed old man with a shock of white hair and a big
prognathous skull from which the sunburned skin hung in
                                                          W. seemed small and
folds like the jowls of a birddog. J.
meek beside him. ^T’m very glad to meet you, sir,” E. R.
Bingham said.       have often said to my girls that had I
grown up in your generation I would have found happy
and useful work in the field of publicrelations. But alas in
my day the path was harder for a young man entering life
with nothing but the excellent tradition of moral fervor
and natural religion I absorbed if I may say so with my
mother’s milk. We had to put our shoulders to the wheel
in those days and it was the wheel of an old muddy wagon
drawn by mules, not the wheel of a luxurious motorcar.”
    E. R, Bingham boomed his way into the diningroom. A
€ovey of palefaced waiters gathered round, pulling out
chairs, setting the table, bringing menucards. ^^Boy, it is no
use handing me the bill of fare,” E. R. Bingham addressed
the headwaiter.       live by nature’s law. I eat only a few
nuts and vegetables and drink raw milk. . .        . Bring me
some cooked spinach, a plate of grated carrots and a glass
of unpasteurized milk. ... As a result, gentlemen, when
I went a few days ago to a great physician at the request of
one of the great lifeinsurance companies in this city he
         498

1412
dumbfounded when he examined me. He could hardly be-
lieve that I was not telling a whopper when I told him I
was seventyone. ^Mr. Bingham/ he said, ^you have the
magnificent physique of a healthy athlete of fortyfive’ . . .
Feel that, young man.” E. R. Bingham flexed his arm
under Dick’s nose. Dick gave the muscle a prod with two
fingers.        sledgehammer,” Dick said, nodding his head.
E. R. Bingham was already talbng again: “You see I prac-
tice what I preach, Mr. Moorehouse . . . and I expect
others to do the same. ... I may add that in the entire
list of remedies and proprietary medicines controlled by
Bingham Products and the Rugged Health Corporation,
there is not a single one that contains a mineral, a drug or
any other harmful ingredient. I have sacrificed time and
time again hundreds of thousands of dollars to strike from
my list a concoction deemed injurious or habitforming by
Dr. Gorman and the rest of the splendid men and women
who make up our research department. Our medicines and
our systems of diet and cure are nature’s remedies, herbs
and simples culled in the wilderness in the four corners of
the globe according to the tradition of wise men and the
findings of sound medical science.”
    “Would you have coffee now, Mr. Bingham, or later?”
    “Coffee, sir, is a deadly poison, as are alcohol, tea and
tobacco. If the shorthaired women and the longhaired men
and the wildeyed cranks from the medical schools, who are
trying to restrict the liberties of the American people to
seek health and wellbeing, would restrict their activities to
the elimination of these dangerous poisons that are sap-
ping the virility of our young men and the fertility of our
lovely American womanhood I would have no quarrel
with them. In fact I would do everything I could to aid
and abet them. Someday I shall put my entire fortune at
the disposal of such a campaign. I know that the plain
people of this country feel as I do because Pm one of them,
born and raised on the farm of plain godfearing farming

                                                                                4^9

1413
folk. The American people need to be protected from
cranks.”
   ^^Thatj Mr. Bingham,” said J. W., ^^will be the keynote
of the campaign we have been outlining.” The fingerbcwls
had arrived. ^Well, Mr. Bingham,” said J. W., getting to
his feet, ^^this has been indeed a pleasure. I unfortunately
shall have to leave you to go downtown to a rather im-
portant directors’ meeting but Mr. Savage here has every-
thing right at his fingertips and can, I know, answei any
further questions. I believe we are meeting with your sales
department at five.”
    As soon as they were alone E. R. Bingham leaned over
the table to Dick and said, ^^Young man, I very much need
a little relaxation this afternoon. Perhaps you could come
to some entertainment as my guest. . . . All work and no
play . . . you know the adage. Chicago has always been
my headquarters and whenever I’ve been in New York
I’ve been too busy to get around.   . .   . Perhaps you could
suggest some sort of show or musical extravaganza. I be-
long to the plain people, let’s go where the plain people
go.” Dick nodded understandingly. “Let’s see, Monday
afternoon . . . I’ll have to call up the office.         .  . . There
ought to be vaudeville. ... I can’t think of anything but
a burlesque show.” “That’s the sort of thing, music and
young women. ... I have high regard for the human
body. My daughters, thank God, are magnificent physical
specimens. . . . The sight of beautiful female bodies is
relaxing and soothing. Come along, you are my guest. It
will help me to make up my mind about this matter. . . .
Between you and me Mr. Moorehouse is a very extraor-
dinary man. I think he can lend the necessary dignity. . , *
But we must not forget that we are talking to the plain
people.”
    “But the plain people aren’t so plain as they were, Mr.
Bingham. They like things a little ritzy now,” said Dick»
following E. R. Bingham’s rapid stride to the checkroom.

         5:00

1414
’'I never wear hat or coat, only that muffler, young lady,’’
E. R. Bingham was booming.
    ^^Have you any children of your own, Mr. Savage?”
asked E. R. Bingham when they were settled in the taxi-
cab. ^‘^No, Pm not married at the moment,” said Dick
shakily, and lit himself a cigarette. “Will you forgive a
man old enough to be your father for pointing something
out to you?” E. R. Bingham took Dick’s cigarette between
two long knobbed fingers and dropped it out of the wii>
dow of the cab. “My friend, you are poisoning yourself
with narcotics and destroying your virility. When I was
around forty years old I was in the midst of a severe eco-
nomic struggle. All my great organization was still in its
infancy. I was a physical wreck, I was a slave to alcohol
and tobacco. I had parted with my first wife and had I had
a wife I wouldn’t have been able to . . . behave with her
as a man should. Well, one day I said to myself: ^Doc
Bingham’—my friends called me Doc in those days—dike
Christian of old you are bound for the City of Destruction
and when you’re gone, you’ll have neither chick nor child
to drop a tear for you.’ I began to interest myself in the
proper culture of the body . . . my spirit I may say wa^i
already developed by familiarity with the classics in my
youth and a memory that many have called prodigious.

. . . The result has been success in every line of endeavor.

. .   . Someday you shall meet my family and see what
sweetness and beauty there can be in a healthy American
home.”
    E. R. Bingham was still talking when they went down
the aisle to seats beside the gangplank at a burlesque show.
Before he could say Jack Robinson, Dick found himself
looking up a series of bare jiggling female legs spotted
from an occasional vaccination. The band crashed and
blared, the girls wiggled and sang and stripped in a smell
of dust and armpits and powder and greasepaint in the
 glare of the moving spot that kept lighting up E. R. Bing-

                                                                                501

1415
ham’s white head. E. R. Bingham was particularly de-
lighted when one of the girls stooped and cooed, ^‘^Why,
look at Grandpa,” and sang into his face and wiggled her
geestring at him. E. R. Bingham nudged Dick and whis-
pered, ^^Get her telephone number.” After she’d moved
on he kept exclaiming,      feel like a boy again.”
    In the intermission Dick managed to call Miss Williams
at the office and to tell her to suggest to people not to
                                                           W. the old buzzard
smoke at the conference. “Tell J.
thinks cigarettes are coffinnails,” he said. “Oh, Mr. Sav-
age,” said Miss Williams reprovingly. At five Dick tried
to get him out but he insisted on staying till the end of
the show. “They’ll wait for me, don’t woiry,” he said.
   When they were back in a taxi on the way to the office
E. R. Bingham chuckled. “By gad, I always enjoy a good
legshow, the human form divine. . .     . Perhaps we might,
my friend, keep the story of our afternoon under our hats.”
Ete gave Dick’s knee a tremendous slap. “It’s great to play
hookey.”
   At the conference Bingham Products signed on the
dotted line. Mr. Bingham agreed to anything and paid no
attention to what went on. Halfway through he said he
"was tired and was going home to bed and left yawning,
leaving Mr. Goldmark and a representative of the J. Win-
throp Hudson Company that did the advertising for Bing-
ham Products to go over the details of the project. Dick
                                                                                         W.
couldn’t help admiring the quiet domineering way J.
had with them. After the conference Dick got drunk and
tried to make a girl he knew in a taxicab but nothing came
of it and he went home to the empty apartment feeling
frightful.
    The next morning Dick overslept. The telephone woke
him. It was Miss Williams calling from the office. Would
Mr. Savage get himself a bag packed and have It sent
down to the station so as be ready to accompany Mn
Moorehouse to Washington on the Congressional. “And,

1416
Mr. Savage,” she added, “excuse me for saying so, but we
all feel at the office that you were responsible for nailing
the Bingham account. Mr. Moorehouse was saying you
must have hypnotized them.” “That’s very nice of you,
Miss Williams,” said Dick in his sweetest voice.
                        W. took a drawingroom on the train. Miss
    Dick and J.
Williams came too and they worked all the way down.
Dick was crazy for a drink all afternoon, but he didn’t dare
take one, although he had a bottle of scotch in his bag, be-
cause Miss Williams would be sure to spot him getting
out the bottle and say something about it in that vague
                                                                            W. felt he
acid apologetic way she had, and he knew J.
drank too much. He felt so nervous he smoked cigarettes

until his tongue began to dry up in his mouth and then
took to chewing chiclets.
                          W. busy with new slants until W. lay
    Dick kept J.                                                       J.
down to take a nap saying he felt a little seedy; then Dick
took Miss Williams to the diner to have a cup of tea and

told her funny stories that kept her in a gale. By the time
they reached the smoky Baltimore tunnels he felt about
ready for a padded cell. He’d have been telling people he
was Napoleon before he got to Washington if he hadn’t

been able to get a good gulp of scotch while Miss Williams
                                                  W. was deep in a bundle of
 was in the ladies’ room and J.
 letters E. R. Bingham had given him between Bingham
 Products and their Washington lobbyist Colonel Judson
 on the threat of pure food legislation.
     When Dick finally escaped to his room in the corner
              W. always took at the Shoreham, he poured out
 suite J.
 a good drink to take quietly by himself, with soda and ice,

 while he prepared a comic telegram to send the girl he

 had a date for dinner with that night at the Colony Club.
 He’d barely sipped the drink when the phone rang. It was

 E. R. Bingham’s secretary calling up from the Willard to

 see if Dick would dine with Mr. and Mrs. Bingham and
                                                                                W. when
  the Misses Bingham. “By all means go,” said J.
                                                                                 503

1417
Dick inquired if he’d need him. “First thing you know I’ll
be completing the transaction by marrying you off to one
of the lovely Bingham girls.”
    The Bingham girls were three strapping young women
named Hygeia, Althea and Myra, and Mrs. Bingham was
a fat faded flatfaced blonde who wore round steel spec-

tacles. The only one of the family who didn’t wear glasses
and have buckteeth was Myra who seemed to take more
after her father. She certainly talked a blue streak. She was
the youngest, too, and E. R. Bingham, who was striding
around in oldfashioned carpetslippers with his shirt open
at the neck and a piece of red flannel undershirt showing
across his chest, introduced her as the artistic member of
the family. She giggled a great deal about how she was
going to New York to study painting. She told Dick he
looked as if he had the artistic temperament.
    They ate in some confusion because Mr. Bingham kept
sending back the dishes, and flew into a towering passion
because the cabbage was overcooked and the raw carrots
weren’t ripe and cursed and swore at the waiters and finally
sent for the manager. About all they’d had was potatosoup
and boiled onions sprinkled with hazelnuts and peanut-
butter spread on wholewheat bread, all washed down with
Coca-Cola, when two young men appeared with a micro-
phone from N.B.C. for E. R. Bingham to broadcast his
eighto’clock health talk. He was suddenly smiling and
hearty again and Mrs. Bingham reappeared from the bed-
room to which she’d retreated crying, with her hands over
her ears not to hear the old man’s foul language. She came
back with her eyes red and a little bottle of smellingsalts
in her hand, just in time to be chased out of the room
again. E. R. Bingham roared that women distracted his
attention from the mike, but he made Dick stay and listen
to his broadcast on health and diet and exercise hints and
to the announcement of the annual crosscountry hike from
Washington to Louisville sponsored by Ruggad Healthy
        504

1418
the Bingham Products houseorgan^ which he was going to
lead in person for the first three days, just to set the pace
for the youngsters, he said.
   After the broadcast Mrs. Bingham and the girls came
in all rouged and powdered up wearing diamond earrings
and pearl necklaces and chinchilla coats. They invited Dick
and the radio young men to go to Keith^s with them but
Dick explained that he had work to do. Before Mrs. Bing-
ham left she made Dick promise to come to visit them at
their home in Eureka. “You come and spend a month,
young feller,’’ boomed E. R. Bingham, interrupting her.

^We’ll make a man of you out there. The first week
orangejuice and high irrigations, massage, rest. . .  . After
that we build you up with crackedwheat and plenty of milk
and cream, a little boxing or trackwork, plenty of hiking
oat in the sun without a lot of stiflmg clothes on, and
you’ll come back a man, nature’s richest handiwork, the
paragon of animals . . , you know the lines of the im-
mortal bard . .     . and you’ll have forgotten all about that
unhealthy New York life that’s poisoning your system.
You come out, young man.  .  . . Well, good night. By the
time I’ve done my deep breathing it’ll be my bedtime.
When I’m in Washington I get up at six every morning
and break the ice in the Basin. . . . How about coming
down for a little dip tomorrow.? Pathe Newsreel is going
to be there. ... It would be worth your while in your
business.” Dick excused himself hastily, saying, “Another
time, Mr. Bingham.”
                                                     W. finishing dinner with
    At the Shoreham he found J.
Senator Planet and Colonel Judson, a smooth pink toad-
faced man with a caressingly amiable manner. The senator
got to his feet and squeezed Dick’s hand warmly. “Why,
boy, we expected to see you come back wearin’ a tigerskm.
                                                                                        W.
. . . Did the old boy show you his chestexpansion?” J.
was frowning. “Not this time, senator,” said Dick quietly.
                                   W. said with some impatience, evi-
    “But, senator,” J.
                                                                                505

1419
dently picking up a speech where it had been broken off,

“it’s the principle of the thing. Once government inter-
ference in business is established as a precedent it means
the end of liberty and private initiative in this country.”
“It means the beginning of red Russian bolshevistic tyr-
anny,” added Colonel Judson with angry emphasis. Sena-
tor Planet laughed. “Aren’t those rather harsh words,
JoeP” “What this bill purports to do is to take the right of
selfmedication from the American people. A set of lazy
government employees and remittancemen will be able to

tell you what laxative you may take and what not. Like all
such things, it’ll be in the hands of cranks and busybodies.
Surely the American people have the right to choose what
products they want to buy. It’s an insult to the intelligence
of our citizens.”
    The senator tipped up an afterdinner coffeecup to get
the last dregs of it, Dick noticed that they were drinking
brandy out of big balloonglasses, “Well,” said the senator
slowly, “what you say may be true but the bill has a good
deal of popular support and you gentlemen mustn’t forget
that I am not entirely a free agent in this matter. I have
to consult the wishes of my constituents ...” “As I look
at It,” interrupted Colonel Judson, “all these socalled pure
food and drug bills are class legislation in favor of the
medical profession. Naturally the doctors want us to con-
sult them before we buy a toothbrush or a package of
                                W. picked up where he left off: “The
licorice powder.” J.
tendency of the growth of scientificallyprepared proprie-
tary medicine has been to make the layman free and self-
sufficient, able to treat many minor ills without consulting
a physician.” The senator finished his brandy without an-
swering.
    “Bowie,” said Colonel Judson, reaching for the bottle
and pouring out some more. “You know as well as I do
that the plain people of your state don’t want their free-
dom of choice curtailed by any Washington snoopers and

1420
busybodies. . . . And weVc got the money and the or^
ganization to be of great assistance in your campaign. Mr.
Moorehouse is about to launch one of the biggest educa-
tional drives the country has ever seen to let the people
know the truth about proprietary medicines, both in the
metropolitan and the rural districts. He will roll up a great
tidal wave of opinion that Congress will have to pay at-
tention to. Pve seen him do it before.^^
    ^^Excellent brandy/^ said the senator. ^Tine Armagnac
has been my favorite for years.” He cleared his throat and
took a cigar from a box in the middle of the table and lit

it in a leisurely fashion. ^^Pve been much criticized of late,
by irresponsible people of course, for what they term my
reactionary association with big business. You know th^
demagogic appeal.”

          IS particularly at a time like this that an intelligently-
run organization can be of most use to a man in public
life,” said Colonel Judson earnestly. Senator Planeds black
eyes twinkled and he passed a hand over the patch of spiky
black hair that had fallen over his low forehead, leaving a
segment of the top of his head bald.             guess it comes
down to how much assistance will be forthcoming,” he
said, getting to his feet. ‘^The parallelogram of forces.”
    The other men got to their feet too. The senator flicked
the ash from his cigar. ^^The force of public opinion, sena-
                     W. portentously. ^^That is what we have to
tor,” said J.
offer.” “Well, Mr. Moorehouse, you must excuse me, I
have some speeches to prepare. . . . This has been most
delightful. . . . Dick, you must come to dinner while
you’re in Washington. WeVe been missing you at our lit-

tle dinners. . . . Goodnight, Joel, see you tomorrow.”

J. W.’s valet was holding the senator’s furlined overcoat
for him. “Mr. Bingham,” said J. W., “is a very public-

spirited man, senator, he’s willing to spend a very consid-

erable sum of money.” “He’ll have to,” said the senator*
    After the door had closed on Senator Planet the rest of

                                                                                507

1421
them sat silent a moment. Dick poured himself a glass ot
the Armagnac. “Well, Mr. Bingham don’t need to worry,’’
said Colonel Judson. “But it’s going to cost him money.
Bowie an’ his fiiends are just tiydng to raise the ante. You
know I can read ’em like a book.      .  . . After all, I been
around this town for fifteen years,”

    “It’s humiliating and absurd that legitimate business
should have to stoop to such methods,” said J. W.
    “Sure, J. W., you took the words right out of my
mouth, ... If you want my opinion, what we need is a
strong man in this country to send all these politicians
packing. . .   . Don’t think I don’t know ’em. . . . But
this little dinnerparty has been very valuable. You are a
new element in the situation. ... A valuable air of dig-
nity, you know.   .  . . Well, goodnight,”
        W, was already standing with his hand outstretched,
    J.
his face white as paper. “Well, I’ll be running along,” said
Colonel Judson. “You can assure your client that that bill
will never pass,     . . . Take a good night’s rest, Mr.
Moorehouse. .  , . Goodnight, Captain Savage.           . . .”
                                                  W. and Dick affectionately
Colonel Judson patted both J.
on the shoulder with his two hands in the same gesture.
Chewing his cigar he eased out of the door leaving a broad
smile behind him and a puff of rank blue smoke.
                                W. who had sunk down in a red plush
    Dick turned to J.
                                                                            W.i^” “It’s
chair. “Are you sure you’re feeling all right, J.
                                              W. said in a weak voice, his
just a little indigestion,” J.
face twisted with pain, gripping the arms of the chair with
both hands. “Well, I guess we’d better all turn in,” said
Dick. “But, J. W., how about getting a doctor in to take a
look at you in the morning?” “We’ll see, goodnight,” said
    W., talking with difficulty with his eyes closed.
J.
    Dick had just got to sleep when a knocking on his door
woke him with a start. He went to the door in his bare
feet. It was Morton,                               cockney valet. “Beg
pardon, sir, for                                                “I’m worried
         508

1422
about Mr. Moorehouse, sir. Dr. Gleason’s with him.      . . ,
I’m afraid it’s a heart attack. He’s in pain something awful,
sir.” Dick put on his purple silk bathrobe and his slippers
and ran into the drawingroom of the suite where he met
the doctor. ^^This is Mr. Savage, sir,” said the valet. The
doctor was a greyhaired man with a grey mustache and a
portentous manner. He looked Dick fiercely in the eye as
he spoke: ^^Mr. Moorehouse must be absolutely quiet for
some days. It’s a very light angina pectoris . .     . not seri-
ous this time but a thorough rest for a few months is in-
dicated. He ought to have a thorough physical examination

.  .  . talk him into it in the morning. I believe you are Mr.
Moorehouse’s business partner, aren’t you, Mr. Savage?”
Dick blushed. ^T’m one of Mr. Moorehouse’s collabora-
tors.” “Take as much off his shoulders as you can.” Dick
nodded. He went back to his room and lay on his bed the
rest of the night without being able to sleep.
    In the morning when Dick went in to see him J. W
was sitting up in bed propped up with pillows. His face
was a rumpled white and he had violet shadows under his
eyes. “Dick, I certainly gave myself a scare.” J. W.’s voice
was weak and shaking, it made Dick feel almost tearful
to hear it. “Well, what about the rest of us?” “Well, Dick,
I’m afraid I’m going to have to dump E. R. Bingham and
a number of other matters on your shoulders. . . . And
I’ve been thinking that perhaps I ought to change the
whole capital structure of the firm. What would you think
of Moorehouse, Griscolm and Savage?” “I think it would
                                                          W. After all Ward
be a mistake to change the name, J.                      J.
Moorehouse is a national institution.”

    J. W.’s voice quavered up a little stronger. He kept
having to clear his thixiat. “I guess you’re right, Dick,”
he said. “I’d like to hold on long enough to give my boys
a start in life.”
    “What do you want to bet you wear a silk hat at my
                    W.? In the first place it may have been an
funeral, J.
                                                                                509

1423
attack of acute indigestion just as you thought. We can’t
go on merely one doctor’s opinion. What would you think
of a little trip to the Mayo clinic? All you need’s a little
overhauling, valves ground, carburetor adjusted, that sort
of thing, ... By the way, J. W., we wouldn’t want Mr.
Bingham to discover that a mere fifteenthousandayear man
was handling his sacred proprietary medicines, would we?”
        W. laughed weakly. “Well, we’ll see about that.     . . .
    J,
I think you’d better go on down to New York this morn-
ing and take charge of the office. Miss Williams and I will
hold the fort here. .     , , She’s sour as a pickle but a treas-
ure, I tell you.”
    “Hadn’t I better stick around until we’ve had a special-

ist look you over«^”
    ^TDr. Gleason filled me up with dope of some kind so
that I’m pretty comfortable. I’ve wired my sister Hazel,
she teaches school over In Wilmington, she’s the only one
of the family I’ve seen much of since the old people died

.  .  . She’ll be over this afternoon. It’s her Christmas vaca-
tion.”
    “Did Morton get you the opening quotations'^”
    “Skyrocketing.   , . . Never saw anything like it.          . . .
But do you know, Dick, I’m going to sell out and lay on
my oars for a while. . . . It’s funny how an experience
like this takes the heart out of you.”
    “You and Paul Warburg,” said Dick.
                                                   W. and closed his eyes for
    “Maybe it’s old age,” said J.
a minute. His face seemed to be collapsing into a mass of
grey and violet wrinkles as Dick looked.
    “Well, take It easy, J. W.,’^ said Dick and tiptoed out of
the room.
    He caught the eleveno’clock train and got to the office
in time to straighten things out. He told everybody that
    W. had a light touch of grippe and would be in bed for
J,
a few days. There was so much work piled up that he gave
Miss Hilles his secretary a dollar for her supper and asked
         510

1424
her to come back at eight. For himself he had some sand-
wiches and a carton of coffee sent up from a delicatessen.
It was midnight before he got through. In the empty-
halls of the dim building he met two rusty old women
coming with pails and scrubbingbrushes to clean the olEce.
The night elevatorman was old and pastyfaced. Snow had
fallen and turned to slush and gave Lexington Avenue a
black gutted look like a street in an abandoned village. A
raw wind whipped his face and ears as he turned uptown.
He thought of the apartment on Fiftysixth Street full of
his mother’s furniture, the gilt chairs in the front room, all
the dreary objects he’d known as a small boy, the Stag at
Bay and the engravings of the Forum Romanorum in his
room, the birdseyemaple bedsj he could see it all sharply
as if he was there as he turned into the wind. Bad enough
when his mother was there, but when she was in St. Augus-
tine, frightful. “God damn it, it’s time I was making
enough money to reorganize my life,” he said to himself.
    He jumped into the first taxi he came to and went to
“63.” It was warm and cozy in “63.” As she helped him
off with his coat and muffler the platinumhaired checkgirl
carried on an elaborate kidding that had been going on aU
winter about how he was going to take her to Miami and
make her fortune at the races at Hialeah. Then he stood s\

second peering through the doorway into the low room
full of wellgroomed heads tables glasses cigarettesmoke
spiraling in front of the pink lights. He caught sight of Pat
Doolittle’s black bang. There she was sitting in the alcove
with Reggie and Jo. The Italian waiter ran up rubbing his
hands. “Good evening, Mr. Savage, we’ve been missing
you.” “I’ve been in Washington.” “Cold down there?”
“Oh, kind of medium,” said Dick and slipped into the red-

leather settee opposite Pat. “Well, look who we have with

 us,” she said. “I thought you were busy poisoning th^-
 American public under the dome of the Capitol.”

                                                                                511

1425
   ^Wouldn^t be so bad if we poisoned some of those west-
ern legislators,” said Dick.
    Reggie held out his hand. ^Well, put it there, Alec
Borgia. ... I reckon you’re on the bourbon if you’ve
been mingling with the conscript fathers.”

    ^^Sure, I’ll drink bourbon .   .  . kids. Pm tired .     .  . Pm
going to eat something. I didn’t have any supper. I just

left the office.”
    Reggie looked pretty tight, so did Pat. Jo was evi-
dently sober and sore. I must fix this up, thought Dick and
put his arm round Pat’s waist. ^^Say, did you get my
’gram^” “Laughed myself sick over it,” said Pat. “Gosh,
Dick, It’s nice to have you back among the drinking

classes.”
    “Say, Dick,” said Reggie, “is there anything in the
rumor that old doughface toppled over?”
    “Mr. Moorehouse had a little attack of acute indiges-
tion ... he was better when I left,” said Dick in a voice
that sounded a little too solemn in his ears.
    “Not drinking gets ’em in the end,” said Reggie. The
girls laughed. Dick put down three bourbons in rapid suc-
cession but he wasn’t getting any lift from them. He just
felt hungry and frazzled. He had his head twisted around
trying to flag the waiter to find out what the devil had hap-
pened to his filetmignon when he heard Reggie drawling,
                        Ward Moorehouse isn’t a man . . . it’s a
“After all J.
 name. ... You can’t feel sorry when a name gets sick.”
    Dick felt a rush of anger flush his head “He’s one of
the sixty most important men in this country,” he said.
 “After all, Reggie, you’re taking his money.      . .
    “Good God,” cried Reggie. “The man on the high
 horse.”
    Pat turned to Dick, laughing. “They seem to be getting
 mighty holy down there in Washington.”
     “No, you know I like to kid as well as anybody. . . .
                                       W. who’s perhaps done more than
 But when a man like J.
         512

1426
any one living man, whether you like what he does or not,
to form the public mind in this country, is taken ill, I think
sophomore wisecracks are in damn bad taste.”
    Reggie was drunk. He was talking in phony southern
dialect. “Wha, brudder, Ah didn’t know as you was Mista
Moahouse in pussen. Ah thunked you was juss a lowdown
wageslavc like the rest of us pickaninnies.”
    Dick wanted to shut up but he couldn’t. “Whether you
like it or not the molding of the public mind is one of the
most important things that goes on in this country. If it
wasn’t for that American business would be in a pretty
pickle. . . . Now we may like the way American business
does things or we may not like it, but it’s a historical fact
like the Himalaya Mountains and no amount of kidding’?
going to change it. It’s only through publicrelations work
that business is protected from wildeyed cranks and dema-
gogues who are always ready to throw a monkeywrench
into the industrial machine.”
    “Hear, hear,” cried Pat.
    ‘Well, you’ll be the first to holler when they cut the
 income from your old man’s firstmortgage bonds,” said
Dick snappishly.
    “Senator,” intoned Reggie, strengthened by another old-
 fashioned, “allow me to congrat’late you . .      . ma soul ’n
body, senator, ’low me to congrat’late you .    .  . upon your
val’able services to this great commonwealth that stretches
 from the great Atlantical ocean to the great and glorious

 Pacifical.”
     “Shut up, Reggie,” said Jo. “Let him eat his steak in
 peace.”                 '

     “Well, you certainly made the eagle scream, Dick,”
 said Pat, “but seriously, I guess you’re right.”
     “We’ve got to be realists,” said Dick.
     “I believe,” said Pat Doolittle, throwing back her head
 and laughing, “that he’s come across with that raise.”
     Dick couldn’t help grinning and nodding. He felt bet

                                                                                 513

1427
tej- since he’d eaten. He ordered another round of drinks
and began to talk about going up to Harlem to dance at
Small’s Paradise. He said he covddn’t go to bed, he was too
tired, he had to have some relaxation. Pat Doolittle said
she loved it in Harlem but that she hadn’t brought any
money. ^‘My party,” said Dick. “I’ve got plenty of cash
on me.”
    They went up with a flask of whiskey in each of the
girls’ handbags and in Dick’s and Reggie’s back pockets.
Reggie and Pat sang The Fireshif in the taxi. Dick drank
a good deal in the taxi to catch up with the others. Going
down the steps to Small’s was like going underwater into
a warm thicklygvown pool. The air was dense with musky
smells of mulatto powder and perfume and lipstick and
dresses and thrnbbed like flesh with the smoothlybalanced
chugging of the band, Dick and Pat danced right away,
holding each other very close. Their dancing seemed
smooth as cream, Dick found her lips under his and kissed
them. She kissed back. When the music stopped they were
reeling a little. They walked back to their table with
drunker dignity. When the band started again Dick danced
with Jo. He kissed her too. She pushed him off a little.
*Dick, you oughtn’t to.” “Reggie won’t mind. It’s all in
the family.   .  . .” They were dancing next to Reggie and
Pat hemmed in by a swaying blur of couples. Dick dropped
Jo’s hand and put his hand on Reggie’s shoulder. “Reggie^,
you don’t mind if I kiss your future wife for you just
once,” “Go as far as you like, senator,” said Reggie. His
voice was thick. Pat was having trouble keeping him on his
feet. Jo gave Dick a waspish look and kept her face turned
away for the rest of the dance. As soon as they got back to
the table she told Reggie that it was after two and she’d
have to go home, she for one had to work in the morning.
   When they were alone and Dick was just starting to
make love to Pat she turned to him and said, “Oh, Dick,
do take me some place low . ,     , nobody’ll ever take me
        514

1428
any place really low.” should think this would be q\zite
low enough for a juniorleaguerj” he said. ^^But this is more
respectable than Broadway, and I^m not a juniorleaguer

 . . I^m the new woman.” Dick burst out laughing. They
both laughed and had a drink on it and felt fond of each
other again and Dick suddenly asked her why couldn’t
they be together always. “I think you’re mean. This isn’t
any place to propose to a girl. Imagine remembering all
your life that you’d got engaged in Harlem. ... I want
to see life.” ^^All right, young lady, we’ll go . . . but
donT blame me if it’s too rough for you.” ^T’m not a
sissy,” said Pat angrily. know it wasn’t the stork.”
    Dick paid and they finished up one of the pints. Outside

it was snowing. Streets and stoops and pavements were
white, innocent, quiet, glittering under the streetlights
with freshfallen snow. Dick asked the whiteeyed black
doorman about a dump he’d heard of and the doorman
gave the taximan the address. Dick began to feel good.
^^Gosh, Pat, isn^t this lovely,” he kept crying. ^^Those kids
can’t take it. Takes us grownups to take it. . . . Say, Reg-
gie^s getting too fresh, do you know it?” Pat held his hand
tight. Her cheeks were flushed and her face had a taut
look. ^Tsn’t it exciting?” she said. The taxi stopped in front
of an unpainted basement door with one electriclightbulb
haloed with snowflakes above it.
    They had a hard time getting in. There were no white
people there at all. It was a furnaceroom set around with
plain kitchen tables and chairs. The steampipes overhead
were hung with colored paper streamers. A big brown
woman in a pink dress, big eyes rolling loose in their dark
sockets and twitching lips, led them to a table. She seemed
to take a shine to Pat. ^^Come right on in, darlin’,” she
laid. ^Where’s you been all my life?”
    Their whiskey was gone so they drank gin. Things got
to whirling round in Dick’s head. He couldn’t get off the
subject of how sore he was at that little squirt Reggie.

                                                                                515

1429
Here Dick had been nursing him along in the ofEce for a
year and now he goes smartaleck on him. The little twirp.
    The only music was a piano where a slimwaisted black
man was tickling the ivories. Dick and Pat danced and
danced and he whirled her around until the sealskin
browns and the highyallers cheered and clapped. Then
Dick slipped and dropped her. She went spinning into a
table where some girls were sitting. Dark heads went back,
pink rubber lips stretched, mouths opened. Gold teeth and
ivories let out a roar.
    Pat was dancing with a pale pretty mulatto girl in a
yellow dress. Dick was dancmg with a softhanded brown
boy in a tightfitting suit the color of his skin. The boy was
whispering in Dick’s ear that his name was Gloria Swan-
son. Dick suddenly broke away from him and went over
to Pat and pulled her away from the girl. Then he ordered
drinks all around that changed sullen looks into smilef
again. He had trouble getting Pat into her coat. The fat
woman was very helpful. “Sure, honey,” she said, “you
don’t want to go on drinkin’ tonight, spoil your lovely
looks.” Dick hugged her and gave her a tendoUar bill.
    In the taxi Pat had hysterics and punched and bit at him
when he held her tight to try to keep her from opening
the door and jumping out into the snow. “You spoil every-
thing. ... You can’t think of anybody except yourself,”
she yelled. “You’ll never go through with anything.” “But,
Pat, honestly,” he was whining, “I thought it was time to
draw the line.” By the time the taxi drew up in front of
the big square apartmenthouse on Park Avenue where she
lived she was sobbing quietly on his shoulder. He took her
into the elevator and kissed her for a long time in the up-
stairs hall before he’d let her put the key in the lock of
her door. They stood there tottering clinging to each other
rubbing up against each other through their clothes until
Dick heard the swish of the rising elevator and opened her
door for her and pushed her in.
        516

1430
    When he got outside the door he found the taxi waiting
for him. He’d forgotten to pay the driver. He couldn’l
stand to go home. He didn’t feel drunk, he felt immensely
venturesome and cool and innocently excited. Patricia
Doolittle he hated more than anybody in the world. ^Hhe
bitch,” he kept saying aloud. He wondered how it would
be to go back to the dump and see what happened and
there he was being kissed by the fat woman who wiggled
her breasts as she hugged him and called him her own
lovin’ chile, with a bottle of gin in his hand pouring drinks
for everybody and dancing cheek to cheek with Gloria
Swanson who was humming in his ear. Do I get it now
... or must I he         . .  , esitate.
    It was morning. Dick was shouting the party couldn’t
break up, they must all come to breakfast with him. Every-
body was gone and he was getting into a taxicab with
Gloria and a strapping black buck he said was his girl-
friend Florence. He had a terrible time getting his key in
the lock. He tripped and fell towards the paleblue light
seeping through his mother’s lace curtains in the windows.
Something very soft tapped him across the back of the
head.
    He woke up undressed in his own bed. It was broad
daylight. The phone was ringing He let it ring. He sat
up. He felt lightheaded but not sick. He put his hand to
his ear and it came away all bloody. It must have been a
stocking full of sand that hit him. He got to his feet. He
felt tottery but he could walk. His head began to ache like
thunder. He reached for the place on the table he usually

left his watch. No watch. His clothes were neatly hung on
a chair. He found the wallet in its usual place, but the roll

     bills was gone. He sat down on the edge of the bed. Of

 all the damn fools. Never never never take a risk like that

again. Now they knew his name his address his phone-
number. Blackmail, oh, Christ. How would it be when
Mother came home from Florida to find her son earning

                                                                                517

1431
twentyfive thousand a year, junior partner of J. Ward
Moorehouse being blackmailed by two nigger whores,
male prostitutes receiving males? Christ. And Pat Doo-

little and the Bingham girls. It would rum his life. For a
second he thought of going into the kitchenette and turn-
ing on the gas.
    He pulled himself together and took a bath. Then he
dressed carefully and put on his hat and coat and went out.

It was only nine o^clock. He saw the time in a jewelePf^
window on Lexington. There was a mirror in the same win-
dow. He looked at his face. Didn^t look so bad, would look
worse later, but he needed a shave and had to do some-
thing about the clotted blood on his ear.
    He didn’t have any money but he had his checkbook.
He walked to a Turkish bath near the Grand Central. The
attendants kidded him about what a fight he’d been in. He
began to get over his scare a little and to talk big about
what he’d done to the other guy. They took his check all
right and he even was able to buy a drink to have before his^
breakfast. When he got to the office his head was still split-
ting but he felt in fair shape. He had to keep his hands
in his pockets so that Miss Hilles shouldn’t see how they
shook. Thank God he didn’t have to sign any letters till
afternoon.
    Ed Griscolm came in and sat on his desk and talked
about J. W.’s condition and the Bingham account and Dick
was sweet as sugar to him. Ed Griscolm talked big about
an offer he’d had from Halsey, but Dick said of course he
couldn’t advise him but that as for him the one place in
the country he wanted to be was right here, especially now
as there were bigger things in sight than there had ever
been before, he and J. W. had had a long talk going down
on the train,        guess you’re right,” said Ed. H guess it
was sour grapes a little,” Dick got to his feet. ^^Honestly,
Ed, old man, you mustn’t think for a minute J. W. doesn’t
appreciate your work. He even let drop something about
         518

1432
a raise.” “Well, it was nice of you to put in a word for mCj
old manj’’ said Ed and they shook hands warmly.
    As Ed was leaving the office he turned and said, ^^Say,
Dick, I wish youM give that youngster Talbot a talking
to. ... I know he^s a friend of yours so I don^t like to
do it, but Jesus Christ, he’s gone and called up again say-
ing he’s in bed with the grippe. That’s the third time this
month.”
    Dick wrinkled up his brows.         don’t know what to do
about him, Ed. He’s a nice kid all right but if he won’t
knuckle down to serious work ... I guess we’ll have to
let him go. We certainly can’t let drinking acquaintance
stand in the way of the efficiency of the office. These kids
all drink too much anyway.”
    After Ed had gone Dick found on his desk a big laven-
der envelope marked Personal. A whiff of strong perfume
came out when he opened it. It was an invitation from
Myra Bingham to come to the housewarming of her studio
on Central Park South. He was still reading it when Miss
Hilles’ voice came out of the interoffice phone. ^^There’s
Mr. Henry B. Furness of the Furness Corporation says he
must speak to Mr. Moorehouse at once.” “Put him on my
phone, Miss Hilles. I’ll talk to him . . . and, by the way,,
put a social engagement on my engagement pad .          .  .

January fifteenth at five o’clock . . . reception Miss Myra
Bingham, 36 Central Park South.’^




                                           NEWSREEL LXVIIJ


                             WALL STREET STUNNED

           TAif is not TKirty^mght hut      old Ninety^-seven
               You must fut her in Center cm ikme

                                                                                519

1433
   MARKET SURE TO RECOVER FROM SLUMP

                                  Decline in Contracts

POLICE TURN MACHINE GUNS ON COLORADO MINE STRIKERS
                                                 WOUND 40
                                   KILL 5

        sympathizers appeared on the scene just as thousands of

office workers were pouring out of the buildings at the lunch
hour. As they raised their placard high and started an indefinite
march from one side to the other, they were jeered and hooted
not only by the office workers but also by workmen on a build-
mg under construction
        NEW METHODS OF SELLING SEEN

        Rescue Crews Try To Upend Ill-fated Craft While
Waiting For Pontoons

      lie looked ^round arl said to hts black greasy fireman
          Jus^ shovel tn a little more coal
      And when we cross that White Oak Mountain
           You can zvatch your Ninety-seven roll

        I find your column interesting and need advice I have
saved four thousand dollars which I want to invest for a better
income. Do you think I might buy stocks^

    POLICE KILLER FLICKS CIGARETTE AS HE
                   GOES TREMBLING TO DOOM

           PLAY AGENCIES IN RING OF SLAVE GIRL MARTS

                     Maker of Love Disbarred as Lawyer

                        Oh the right wing clothesmakers
                        And the Socialist jakers
                        They make by the workers . . 
                       Double cross

                        They freach Social-ism
                        But fractice Fasc-ism
                        To keef cafitalism
                        By the boss

1434
  MOSCOW CONGRESS OUSTS OPPOSITION

        11^S a mighty rough road from Lynchburg to Danville
            An^ a line on a three rrvtle grade
        It was on that grade he lost hts average
             An^ you see what a jumf he made

                          MILL THUGS IN MURDER RAID

        here is the most dangerous example of how at the decisive
moment the bourgeois ideology liquidates class solidarity and
turns a friend of the workingclass of yesterday into a most mis-
erable propagandist for imperialism today

RED PICKETS FINED FOR PROTEST HERE
                      We leave our home in the morning
                          We kiss our children goodby

              OFFICIALS STILL HOPE FOR RESCUE OF MEN

    He was gom^ downgrade makird ninety miles an hour
         When his whistle broke into a scream
    He was found m the wreck with his hand on the throttle
         An^ was scalded to death with the steam

        RADICALS FIGHT WITH CHAIRS AT UNITY MEETING

                    PATROLMEN PROTECT REDS

         U.s. CHAMBER OF COMMERCE URGES CONFIDENCE

                   REAL VALUES UNHARMED

                           While we slave for the bosses
                               Our children scream ard cry
                           But when we draw our money
                               Our grocery bills to fay

        PRESIDENT SEES PROSPERITY NEAR

                           Not a cent to sfend for clothing
                               Not a cent to lay away

1435
           STEAMROLLER IN ACTION AGAINST MILITANTS

                         MINERS BATTLE SCABS

                     But we cannot buy for our children
                         Our wages are too low
                     Now listen to me you workers
                         Both you women and men
                     Let us win for them the victory
                         Pm sure it airdt no sin

                    CARILLON PEALS IN SINGING TOWER

        the President declared it was impossible to view the in-
creased advantages for the many without smiling at those who
a short time ago expressed so much fear lest our country might
come under the control of a few individuals of great wealth

                     HAPPY CROWDS THRONG CEREMONY

        on a tiny island nestling like a green jewel in the lake that
mirrors the singing tower, the President today participated m
the dedication of a bird sanctuary and its pealing carillon, ful-
filling the dream of an immigrant boy



                                  THE CAMERA EYE (51)


         at the head of the valley in the dark of the hills on

the broken floor of a lurchedover cabin a man halfsits

halflies propped up by an old woman two wrinkled girls

that might be young              chunk? of coal flare in the hearth

flicker in his face white and sagging as dough                   blacken

the cavedm mouth the taut throat the belly swelled enor-

mous with the wound he got working on the minetipple

         the barefoot girl brings him a tincup of water                    the

1436
woman wipes sweat off his streaming face with a dirty
denim sleeve         the firelight flares in his eyes stretched

big with fever in the women’s scared eyes and in the

blanched faces of the foreigners

        without help in the valley hemmed by dark strike-

silent hills the man will die (my father died we know what

it is like to see a man die) the women will lay him out

on the rickety cot the miners will bury him


        in the jail it’s light too hot the steamheat hisses we

talk through the greenpainted iron bars to a tall white

mustachioed old man some smiling miners in shirtsleeves

a boy        faces white from mining have already the tah

lowy look of jailfaces

        foreigners what can we say to the dead?        foreign-

ers what can we say to the jailed?           the representative

of the political party talks fast through the bars join up

with us and no other union we’ll send you tobacco candy

solidarity our lawyers will write briefs speakers will shout

your names at meetings they’ll carry your names on card-

board on picketlines        the men in jail shrug their shoul-

ders smile thinly our eyes look in their eyes through the

bars        what can I say?        (in another continent I have

seen the faces looking out through the barred basement

 windows behind the ragged sentry’s boots I have seen be-

fore day the straggling footsore prisoners herded through

 the streets limping between bayonets       heard the volley

                                                                                523

1437
        I have seen the dead lying out in those distant deeper

 ^alleys)        what can we say to the jailed?



        in the law’s office we stand against the wall the law is

t big man with eyes angry m a big pumpkinface who sits

Sind stares at us meddling foreigners through the door the

deputies crane with their guns        they stand guard at the

mines       they blockade the miners’ soupkitchens

they’ve cut off the road up the valley              the hiredmen

with guns stand ready to shoot (they have made us foreign-

ers in the land where we were bom they are the conquer-

ing army that has filtered into the country unnoticed they

have taken the hilltops by stealth they levy toll they stand

at the mmehead       they stand at the polls         they stand

by when the bailiffs carry the furniture of the family

evicted from the city tenement out on the sidewalk they

are there when the bankers foreclose on a farm they are

ambushed and ready to shoot down the strikers marching

behind the flag up the switchback road to the mine

those that the guns spare they jail)

       the law stares across the desk out of angry eyes his

face reddens in splotches like a gobbler’s neck with the

strut of the power of submachineguns sawedoffshotguns

teargas and vomitinggas the power that can feed you or

leave you to starve

       sits easy at his desk his back is covered he feels strong

behind him he feels the prosecutingattorney the judge an

        524

1438
owner himself the political boss the minesupermtendent

the board of directors the president of the utility the ma*
nipuktor of the holdingcompany

        he lifts his hand towards the telephone

        the deputies crowd in the door
        we have only words against



                                 POWER SUPERPOWER


        In eighteen eighty when Thomas Edison’s agent
was hooking up the first telephone in London, he put
an ad in the paper for a secretary and stenographer.
The eager young cockney with sprouting muttonchop
whiskers who answered it
        had recently lost his job as officeboy. In his spare
time he had been learning shorthand and bookkeeping
and taking dictation from the editor of the English
Vanity Fair at night and jotting down the speeches in
Parliament for the papers. He came of temperance
                                           already he was butting his
smallshopkeeper stock j
bullethead against the harsh structure of caste that
doomed boys of his class to a life of alpaca jackets, pen-
manship, subordination. To get a job with an American
firm was to put a foot on the rung of a ladder that led
up into the blue.
        He did his best to make himself indispensable 5
they let him operate the switchboard for the first half-
hour when the telephone service was opened. Edison
noticed his weekly reports on the electrical situation in
England
        and sent for him to be his personal secretary.

                                                                               525

1439
        Samuel Insull landed in America on a raw March
day in eightyone. Immediately he was taken out to
Menlo Park, shown about the little group of labora-
tories, saw the strings of electriclightbulbs shining at in-
tervals across the snowy lots, all lit from the world’s
first central electric station. Edison put him right to
work and he wasn’t through till midnight. Next morn-
ing at six he was on the jobj Edison had no use for any
nonsense about hours or vacations. Insull worked from
                                                                                  no
that time on until he was seventy without a break 3
nonsense about hours or vacations. Electric power
turned the ladder into an elevator.
        Young Insull made himself indispensable to Edi-
son and took more and more charge of Edison’s busi-
ness deals. He was tireless, ruthless, reliable as the
tides, Edison used to say, and fiercely determined to
rise.


        In ninetytwo he induced Edison to send him to
Chicago and put him in as president of the Chicago
Edison Company. Now he was on his own. My engi-
neering, he said once in a speech, when he was suffi-
ciently czar of Chicago to allow himself the luxury of
plain speaking, has been largely concerned with engi-
neering all I could out of the dollar.
        He was a stiffly arrogant redfaced man with a
closecropped mustache; he lived on Lake Shore Drive
and was at the office at 7:10 every morning. It took
him fifteen years to merge the five electrical companies
into the Commonwealth Edison Company. Very early
J discovered that the first essential, as in other fublk
utility business, was that it should be oferated as a
monofoly.
        When his power was firm in electricity he captured
gas, spread out into the surrounding townships in
        526

1440
northern Illinois. When politicians got in his way, he
bought them, when laborleadsrs got in his way he
bought them. Incredibly his power grew. He was
scornful of bankers, lawyers were his hired men. He
put his own lawyer in as corporation counsel and
through him ran Chicago. When he found to his
amazement that there were men (even a couple of
young lawyers, Richberg and Ickes) in Chicago that
he couldn’t buy, he decided he’d better put on a show
for the public 5
        Big Bill Thompson, the Builder:
        'pwnch King George in the nose,
         the hunt for the treeclimbing fish,
         the Chicago Opera.
         It was too easyj the public had money, there was
one of them born every minute, with the founding of
Middlewest Utilities in nineteen twelve Insull began
to use the public’s money to spread his empire. His
companies began to have open stockholders’ meetings,
to ballyhoo service, the small investor could sit there
all day hearing the bigwigs talk. It’s fun to be fooled.
                                                                            everybody
Companyunions hypnotized his employees j
had to buy stock in his companies, employees had to
go out and sell stock, officeboys, linemen, trolley-
conductors. Even Chven D. Young was afraid of him.
My ex-perience is that the greatest atd in the e-ffictency
of labor is a long line of men waiting at the gate.


         War shut up the progressives (no more nonsense
about trustbusting, controlling monopoly, the public
good) and raised Samuel Insull to the peak.
         He was head of the Illinois State Council of De-
 fense. iVow, he said delightedly, / can do anything 1

 like. With it came the perpetual spotlight, the purple

 taste of empire. If anybody didn’t like what Samuel
                                                                                527

1441
Insull did he was a traitor. Chicago damn well kept its
mouth shut.
       The Insull companies spread and merged put com-
petitors out of business until Samuel Insull and his
stooge brother Martin controlled through the leverage
of holdingcompanies and directorates and blocks of
minority stock
        light and power, coalmines and tractioncompanies
        in Illinois, Michigan, the Dakotas, Nebraska, Ar-
kansas, Oklahoma, Missouri, Maine, Kansas, Wiscon-
sin, Virginia, Ohio, North Carolina, Indiana, New
York, New Jersey, Texas, in Canada, m Louisiana, in
Georgia, in Florida and Alabama.
        (It has been figured out that one dollar in Middle
West Utilities controlled seventeen hundred and fifty
dollars invested by the public in the subsidiary com-
panies that actually did the work of producing elec-
tricity. With the delicate lever of a voting trust con-
trolling the stock of the two top holdingcompanies he
controlled a twelfth of the power output of America.)
        Samuel Insull began tq think he owned all that
the way a man owns the roll of bills in his back pocket
        Always he’d been scornful of bankers. He owned
quite a few in Chicago. But the New York bankers
were laying for himj they felt he was a bounder, w'his-
pered that this financial structure was unsound. Fin-
gers itched to grasp the lever that so delicately moved
 this enormous power over lives,
        superpower, Insull liked to call it.


        A certain Cyrus S. Eaton of Cleveland, an ex-
 Baptistminister, was the David that brought down this
 Goliath. Whether it was so or not he made Insull be-
 lieve that Wall Street was behind him.
        He started buying stock in the three Chicago
         528

1442
utilities. Insull in a panic for fear he’d lose his control
went into the market to buy against him. Finally the
Reverend Eaton let himself be bought out, shaking
down the old man for a profit of twenty million dol-
lars.
        The stockmarket crash.
        Paper values were slipping. Insull’s companies
were intertwined in a tangle that no bookkeeper has
ever been able to unravel.
        The gas hissed out of the torn balloon. Insull
threw away his imperial pride and went on his knees
to the bankers.
         The bankers had him where they wanted him. To
save the face of the tottering czar he was made a re-
ceiver of his own concerns. But the old man couldn’t
get out of his head the illusion that the money was all
his. When it was discovered that he was using the
stockholders’ funds to pay off his brothers’ brokerage
accounts it was too thick even for a federal judge. Tn-
sull was forced to resign.
         He held directorates in eightyfive companies, he
was chairman of sixtyfive, president of eleven: it took
him three hours to sign his resignations.
         As a reward for his services to monopoly his com-
panies chipped in on a pension of eighteen thousand a
year. But the public was shouting for criminal prosecu-
tion. When the handouts stopped newspapers and poli-
ticians turned on him. Revolt against the moneymanip-
 ulators was in the air. Samuel Insull got the wind up
and ran off to Canada with his wife.
         Extradition proceedings. He fled to Paris. When
 the authorities began to close in on him there he slipped
 away to Italy, took a plane to Tirana, another to Sa-
 loniki and then the train to Athens. There the old fox
 went to earth. Money talked as sweetly in Athens as it
 had in Chicago in the old days.

                                                                                529

1443
       The American ambassador tried to extradite him.
Insull hired a chorus of Hellenic lawyers and politicos
and sat drinking coffee in the lobby of the Grande
Bretagne, while they proceeded to tie up the ambas-
sador in a snarl of chican&ry as complicated as the book-
keeping of his holdingcompanies. The successors of
Demosthenes were delighted. The ancestral itch in
many a Hellenic palm was temporarily assuaged. Sam-
uel Insull settled down cozily in Athens, was stirred
by the sight of the Parthenon, watched the goats feed-
ing on the Pentelic slopes, visited the Areopagus, ad-
mired marble fragments ascribed to Phidias, talked
with the local bankers about reorganizing the public
utilities of Greece, was said to be promoting Macedo-
nian lignite. He was the toast of the Athenians^ Mme.
Kouryoumdjouglou the vivacious wife of a Bagdad
datemerchant devoted herself to his comfort. When
the first effort at extradition failed, the old gentleman
declared in the courtroom, as he struggled out from the
embraces of his four lawyers : Greece is a small hut great
country.
        The idyll was interrupted when the Roosevelt Ad-
ministration began to put the heat on the Greek foreign
office. Government lawyers in Chicago were accumu-
lating truckloads of evidence and chalking up more and
more drastic indictments.
        Finally after many a postponement (he had hired
physicians as well as lawyers, they cried to high heaven
that it would kill him to leave the genial climate of the
Attic plain),
        he was ordered to leave Greece as an undesirable
alien to the great indignation of Balkan society and of
 Mme. Kouryoumdjouglou.
        He hired the Mdotis a small and grubby Greek
 freighter and panicked the foreignnews services by
 slipping off for an unknown destination.
         530

1444
        It was rumored that the new Odysseus was bound
for Aden, for the islands of the South Seas, that he’d
been invited to Persia. After a few days he turned up
rather seasick in the Bosporus on his way, it was said,
to Rumania where Madame Kouryoumdjouglou had
advised him to put himself under the protection of her
friend la Lupescu.
        At the request of the American ambassador the
Turks were delighted to drag him off the Greek
freighter and place him in a not at all comfortable jail.
Again money had been mysteriously wafted from Eng-
land, the healing balm began to flow, lawyers were
hired, interpreters expostulated, doctors made diag-
noses 5
        but Angora was boss
         and Insull was shipped off to Smyrna to be turned
over to the assistant federal districtattorney who had
come all that way to arrest him.
         The Turks wouldn’t even let Mme. Kouryoumd-
jouglou, on her way back from making arrangements in
Bucharest, go ashore to speak to him. In a scuffle with

the officials on the steamboat the poor lady was pushed
overboard
         and with difficulty fished out of the Bosporus.
         Once he was cornered the old man let hirnself
tamely be taken home on the Exilona, started writing

his memoirs, made himself agreeable to his fellow pas-

 sengers, was taken off at Sandy Hook and rushed to

 Chicago to be arraigned.
         In Chicago the government spitefully kept him a

 couple of nights in jailj men he’d never known, so the

 newspapers said, stepped forward to go on his two-

 hundredandfiftythousanddollar bail. He was moved to

 a hospital that he himself had endowed. Solidarity
 The leading businessmen in Chicago were photographed

 visiting him there. Henry Ford paid a call.

                                                                                 53

1445
       The trial was very beautiful. The prosecution got
bogged in finance technicalities. The judge was not un-
friendly. The Insulls stole the show.
       They were folks, they smiled at reporters, they
posed for photographers, they went down to the court-
room by bus. Investors might have been ruined but so,
                                                                                 the
they allowed it to be known, were the Insulls 5
captain had gone down with the ship.
        Old Samuel Insull rambled amiably on the stand,
told his lifestory; from officeboy to powermagnate, his
struggle to make good, his love for his home and the
                                                                               who
kiddies. He didn’t deny he’d made mistakes j
hadn’t, but they were honest errors. Samuel Insull
wept. Brother Martin wept. The lawyers wept.
With voices choked with emotion headliners of Chicago
business told from the witnessstand how much Insull
had done for business in Chicago. There wasn’t a dry
eye in the jury.
        Finally driven to the wall by the prosecutingattor-
ney Samuel Insull blurted out that yes, he had made an
error of some ten million dollars in accounting but that
it had been an honest error.
        Verdict: Not Guilty.
        Smiling through their tears the happy Insulls
went to their towncar amid the cheers of the crowd.
Thousands of ruined investors, at least so the news-
papers said, who had lost their life savings sat crying
over the home editions at the thought of how Mr. Insull
had suffered. The bankers were happy, the bankers
had moved in on the properties.
        In an odor of sanctity the deposed monarch of
superpower, the officeboy who made good, enjoys
his declining years spending the pension of twenty-
one thousand a year that the directors of his old com-
panies dutifully restored to him. After fifty years of
workf he said, my joh is gone.
         532

1446
                                                  MARY FRENCH


    Mary French had to stay late at the office and couldn’t
get to the hall until the meeting was almost over. There
were no seats left so she stood in the back. So many people
were standing in front of her that she couldn’t see Don,
she could only hear his ringing harsh voice and feel the
tense attention in the silence during his pauses. When a
roar of applause answered his last words and the hall filled
suddenly with voices and the scrape and shuffle of feet she
ran out ahead of the crowd and up the alley to the back
door. Don was just coming out of the black sheetiron door
talking over his shoulder as he came to two of the miners’
delegates. He stopped a second to hold the door open for
them with a long arm. His face had the flushed smile,
there was the shine in his eye he often had after speaking,
the look, Mary used to tell herself, of a man who had just
come from a date with his best girl. It was some time be-
 fore Don saw her m the group that gathered round him in
the alley. Without looking at her he swept her along with
the men he was talking to and walked them fast towards
 the corner of the street. Eyes looked after them as they
 went from the groups of furworkers and garmentworkers

 that dotted the pavement in front of the hall. Mary
 tingled with the feeling of warm ownership in the looks

 of the workers as their eyes followed Don Stevens down
 the street.

     It wasn’t until they were seated in a small lunchroom
 under the el that Don turned to Mary and squeezed her

 hand. “Tired?” She nodded. “Aren’t you, Don?” He
 laughed and drawled, “No, I’m not tired. I’m hungry.”
     “Comrade French, I thought we’d detailed you to see

  that Comrade Stevens ate regular,” said Rudy Goldfarb

  with a flash of teeth out of a dark Italianlooking face.

                                                                                 533

1447
    "'He won^t evei eat anything when he^s gomg to speak,”
Mary said.
          make up for it afterwards,” said Don. ^^Say, Mary,
t hope you have some change. I donk think Pve got a cent
 on me.” Mary nodded, smiling. “Mother came across
again,” she whispered.
    “Money,” broke in Steve Mestrovich. “We got to have
money or else weVe licked.” “The truck got off today,”
said Mary. “ThaPs why I was so late getting to the meet-
ingo” Mestrovich passed the grimed bulk of his hand
across his puttycolored face that had a sharply turnedup
nose peppered with black pores. “If cossack donk git him.”
    “Eddy Spellman^s a smart kid. He gets through like a
shadow. I donk know how he does it.”
    “You donk know what them clothes means to women
and kids and    .  .  . listen, Miss French, donk hold back
nothin’ because too raggedy. Ain’t nothin’ so ragged like
what our little kids got on their backs.”
    “Eddy’s taking five cases of condensed milk. We’ll have
more as soon as he comes back.”
    “Say, Mary,” said Don suddenly, looking up from his
plate of soup, “how about calling up Sylvia^ I forgot to
ask how much we collected at the meeting.” Young Gold-
farb got to his feet. “I’ll call. You look tired, Comrade
French. . . . Anybody got a nickel?”
    “Here, I got nickel,” said Mestrovich. He threw back
ixis head and laughed. ‘^Damn funny . . . miner with
nickel. Down our way miner got nickel put in frame send
 Meester Carnegie Museum .    . . very rare.” He got up
tearing laughter and put on his black longvisored miner’s
 lap. “Goodnight, comrade, I walk Brooklyn. Reliefcom-
mittee nine o’clock . . . right, Miss French?” As he
strode out of the lunchroom the heavy tread of his black
boots made the sugarbowls jingle on the tables. “Oh,
Lord,” said Mary, with tears suddenly coming to her eyes.
'“That was his last n^kel.”

         534

1448
    Goldfarb came back saying that the collection hadn\
been so good. Sixtynine dollars and some pledges. “Christ-
mas time coming on . . . you know. Everybody’s always
broke at Christmas.” “Henderson made a lousy speech/^
grumbled Don. “He’s more of a socialfascist every day.’^
    Mary sat there feeling the tiredness in every bone of her
body waiting until Don got ready to go home. She was too
sleepy to follow what they were talking about but every
now and then the words centralcommittee, expulsions, op-
positionists, splitters rasped in her ears. Then Don was
tapping her on the shoulder and she was waking up and
walking beside him through the dark streets.
    “It’s funny, Don,” she was saying, “I always go to sleep
when you talk about party discipline. I guess it’s because
I don'^t w^ant to hear about it.” “No use being sentimental
about it,” said Don savagely. “But is it sentimental to be
more interested in saving the miners’ unions?” she said,
suddenly feeling wide awake again. “Of course that’s what
we all believe but we have to follow the party line. A lot
of those boys     . . . Goldfarb’s one of them          .  . . Ben
Compton’s another .    . . think this is a debatingsociety.
If they’re not very careful indeed they’ll find themselves
out on their ear. ... You just watch.”
    Once they’d staggered up the five flights to their dingy

little apartment where Mary had always planned to put
up curtains but had never had time, Don suddenly caved

in with fatigue and threw himself on the couch and fell
asleep without taking off his clothes. Mary tried to roxise
him but gave it up. She unlaced his shoes for him and
threw a blanket over him and got into bed herself and
tried to sleep.
    She was staring wide awake, she was counting old pairs

of trousers, torn suits of woolly underwear, old armyshirts
with the sleeves cut off, socks with holes in them that

didn’t match. She was seeing the rickety children with
puffy bellies showing through their rags, the scrawny

                                                                                535

1449
women with uncombed hair and hands distorted with
workj the boys with their heads battered and bleeding from
the clubs of the Coal and Iron Police, the photograph of a
minePs body shot through with machinegun bullets. She
got up and took two or three swigs from a bottle of gin
she kept in the medicinecloset in the bathroom. The gin
burned her throat. Coughing she went back to bed and
w^nt off into a hot dreamless sleep.
   Towards morning Don woke her getting into the bed.
He kissed her. ^^Darling, IVe set the alarm for seven.
... Be sure to get me up. Pve got a very important com~
mitteemeeting. ... Be sure and do it.^’ He went off to
sleep again right away like a child. She lay beside his big-
boned lanky body, listening to his regular breathing, feel-
ing happy and safe there in the bed with him.
    Eddy Spellman got through with his truck again and
distributed his stuff to several striking locals U.M.W. in
the Pittsburgh district, although he had a narrow squeak
when the deputies tried to ambush him near Greensburg.
They'd have nabbed him if a guy he knew who was a
bootlegger hadn^t tipped him off. The same bootlegger
helped him out when he skidded into a snowdrift on the
hill going down into Johnstown on the way back. He was
laughing about it as he helped Mary pack up the new ship-
ment. ^^He wanted to give me some liquor. .      . . He’s a
good feller, do you know it, Miss Mary? . .              . Tough
kinder .    .  . that racket hardens a feller up        . . . but a
prince when you know him. . .          . ^Hell, no, Ed,’ his
name’s Eddy too, I says to him when he tries to slip me
a pint, T ain’t goin’ to take a drink until after the revolu-
tion and then Pll be ridin’ so high I won’t need to.’ ”
Mary laughed,         guess we all ought to do that, Eddy.

. .   . But I feel so tired and discouraged at night some-
times.” ^^Sure,” said Eddy, turning serious. ^Tt gits you
down thinkln’ how they got all the guns an’ all the money
an’ we ain’t got nothin’.”

         536

1450
    ^^One thing youh'e going to have. Comrade Spellman,
is a pair of warm gloves and a good overcoat before you
make the next trip.^’
    His freckled face turned red to the roots of his red hair,
^^Honestj Miss Mary, I don’t git cold. To tell the truth
the motor heats up so much in that old pile of junk it
keeps me warm in the coldest weather. . . . After the
next trip we got to put a new clutch in her and that’ll take
more jack than we kin spare from the milk. ... I tell
you things are bad up there in the coalfields this winter.”
    ^^But those miners have got such wonderful spirit,” said
Mary.
    “The trouble is, Mtss Mary, you kin only keep your
spirit up a certain length of time on an empty stumick.”
    That evening Don came by to the office to get Mary for
supper. He was very cheerful and his gaunt bony face
had more color in it than usual. “Well, little girl, what
would you think of moving up to Pittsburgh? After the
plenum I may go out to do some organizing in western
Pennsylvania and Ohio. Mestrovich says they need some-
body to pep ’em up a little.” Eddy Spellman looked up
from the bale of clothes he was tying up. “Take it from
me, Comrade Stevens, they sure do.”
    Mary felt a chill go through her. Don must have no-
ticed the pallor spreading over her face. “We won’t take
any risks,” he added hurriedly. “Those miners take good
care of a feller, don’t they, Eddy?” “They sure do.        .  . .
Wherever the locals is strong you’ll be safer than you are
right here in New York.” “Anyway,” said Mary, her
throat tight and dry, “if you’ve got to go you’ve got to
go.”
    “You two go out an’ eat,” said Eddy. “I’ll finish up

. . . I’m bunkin’ here anyway. Saves the price of a flop.

. , . You feed Miss Mary up good. Comrade Stevens. Wc
don’t want her gettin’ sick. ... If all the real partymem-
bers worked like she does we’d have . . . hell, we’d hav^

                                                                                537

1451
the finest kind of a revolution by the spring of the year.”
    They went out laughing, and walked down to Bleecker
Street and settled happily at a table in an Italian restau-
rant and ordered up the seventyfivecent dinner and a bottle
of wine. ^^YouVe got a great admirer in Eddy,” Don said,
smiling at her across the table.
    A couple of weeks later Mary came home one icy winter
evening to find Don busy packing his grip. She couldn’t
help letting out a cry, her nerves were getting harder and
harder to control. “Oh, Don, it’s not Pittsburgh yet^” Don
shook his head and went on packing. When he had closed
up his wicker suitcase he came over to her and put his arm
round her shoulder. “I’ve got to go across to the other side
with .    . . you know who . .       . essential party business.”
    “Oh, Don, I’d love to go too. I’ve never been to Russia
or anywhere.” “I’ll only be gone a month. We’re sailing
at midnight .    .  . and Mary darling ... if anybody asks
after me I’m in Pittsburgh, see^^” Mary started to cry. “I’ll
have to say I don’t know where you are ... I know I
can’t ever get away with a lie.” “Mary dear, it’ll just be a
few days   . . . don’t be a little silly.” Mary smiled
through her tears. “But I am .          . . I’m an awful little
silly.” He kissed her and patted her gently on the back.
Then he picked up his suitcase and hurried out of the room
with a big checked cap pulled down over his eyes.
    Mary walked up and down the narrow room with her
lips twitching, fighting to keep down the hysterical sobs.
To give herself something to do she began to plan how she
could fix up the apartment so that it wouldn’t look so
dreary when Don came back. She pulled out the couch and
pushed it across the window like a windowseat. Then she
pulled the table out in front of it and grouped the chairs
round the table. She made up her mind she’d paint the
woodwork white and get turkeyred for the curtains.
    Next morning she was in the middle of drinking her
colfee out of a cracked cup without a saucer, feeling bit-
         5?8

1452
terly lonel) m the empty apartment when the telephone
rang. At first she dida^t recognize whose voice it was. She
was confused and kept stammering, ^Who is it, please
into the receiver. “But, Mary,^" the voice was saying in an
exasperated tone, “you must know who I am. It’s Ben
Compton .   . . bee ee enn .    .  . Ben. I’ve got to see you
about something. Where could I meet you? Not at yo-ur
place.” Mary tried to keep her voice from sounding stiff
and chilly. “I’ve got to be uptown today. I’ve got to have
lunch with a woman who may give some money to the
miners. It’s a homble waste of time but I can’t help it.
She won’t give a cent unless I listen to her sad story. How
about meeting me in front of the Public Library at two
thirty?” “Better say inside.    . .   . It’s about zero out today.
I just got up out of bed from the flu.”
    Mary hardly knew Ben he looked so much older. There
was grey in the hair spilling out untidily from under his

cap. He stooped and peered into her face querulously
through his thick glasses. He didn’t shake hands. “Well,
                                                 you’ll know it soon enough
I might as well tell you . . .

if you don’t know it already . . . I’ve been expelled from
the party . . . oppositionist . . , exceptionalism ... a
lot of nonsense. . .   . Well, that doesn’t matter, I’m still a
revolutionist . . . I’ll continue to work outside of the
party.”
    “Oh, Ben, I’m so sorry,” was all Mary could find to say.
“You know I don’t know anything except what I read in
the Daily. It all seems too terrible to me.” “Let’s go out,

that guard’s watching us.” Outside Ben began to shiver
from the cold. His wrists stuck out red from his frayed
green overcoat with sleeves much too short for his long
arms. “Oh, where can we go?” Mary kept saying.
    Finally they went down into a basement automat and

sat talking in low voices over a cup of coffee. “I didn’t
want to go to your place because I didn’t want to meet
 Stevens. . . . Stevens and me have never been friends,

                                                                               539

1453
 j^ou know            ... Now he’s in with the Comintern
 crowd. He’ll make the centralcommittee when they’ve
 cleaned out all the brainc ”

     “But, Ben, people can have differences of opinion and

 still .    .
     “A party of yesmen . . . that’ll be great. .               .  . But,
 Mary, I had to see you ... I feel so lonely suddenly

 .  .  . you know, cut off from everything. ... You know
 if we hadn’t been fools we’d have had that baby that time

 .  .  . we’d still love each other. . .     . Mary, you were very
 lovely to me when I first got out of jail. . . . Say, where’s
 your friend Ada, the musician who had that fancy apart-
 ment?”
     “Oh, she’s as silly as ever . .        . running around with
 some fool violinist or other.”

' “I’ve always liked music. ... I ought to have kept
 you, Mary.”
     “A lot of water’s run under the bridge since then,” said
 Mary coldly.
     “Are you happy with Stevens? I haven’t any right to
 ask.”
     “But, Ben, what’s the use of raking all this old stuff up
     “You see, often a young guy thinks, I’ll sacrifice every-
 thing, and then when he is cut off all that side of his life,
 he’s not as good as he was, do you see? For the first time
 in my life I have no contact. I thought maybe you could
 get me in on reliefwork somehow. TTie discipline isn’t so
 strict in the relief organizations.”
     “I don’t think they want any disrupting Influences In the
 I.L.D.,” said Mary.
     “So I’m a disrupter to you too.       .  . . All right, in the
 end the workingclass will judge between us.”
     “Let’s not talk about it, Ben.”
     “I’d like you to put it up to Stevens and ask him to
 sound out the proper quarters . . * that’s not much to
 ask, is it?”

          540

1454
   “But Don^s not here at present.’^ Before she could catch
herself she’d blurted it out.
   Ben looked her in the eye with a sudden sharp look.
    “He hasn’t by any chance sailed for Moscow with cer-
tain other comrades?”
    “He’s gone to Pittsburgh on secret partywork and for
God’s sake shut up about it. You just got hold of me to
pump me.” She got to her feet, her face flaming. “Well,
goodby, Mr. Compton. ... You don’t happen to be a
stoolpigeon as well as a disrupter, do you^”
    Ben Compton’s face broke in pieces suddenly the way a
child’s face does when it is just going to bawl. He sat
there staring at her, senselessly scraping the spoon round
and round in the empty coffeemug. She was halfway up
the stairs when on an impulse she went back and stood for
a second looking down at his bowed head. “Ben,” she said
in a gentler voice, “I shouldn’t have said that      ,  .  . with-
out proof. ... I don’t believe it.” Ben Compton didn’t
look up. She went up the stairs again out into the stinging
wind and burned down Fortysecond Street in the after-
noon crowd and took the subway down to Union Square.
    The last day of the year Mary French got a telegram
at the ofBce from Ada Cohn, please please communicate
YOUR MOTHER IN TOWN AT PLAZA SAILING SOON WANTS TO
SEE YOU DOESNT KNOW ADDRESS WHAT SHALL I TELL HER.
Newyearsday there wasn’t much doing at the ofiice. Mary
was the only one who had turned up, so in the middle of
the morning she called up the Plaza and asked for Mrs.
French. No such party staying there. Next she called up
Ada. Ada talked and talked about how Mary’s mother had
married again, a Judge Blake, a very prominent man, a

retired federal circuit judge, such an attractive man with
a white Vandyke beard and Ada had to see Mary and Mrs.
Blake had been so sweet to her and they’d asked her to
dinner at the Plaza and wanted to know all about Mary
and that she’d had to admit that she never saw her al-

                                                                                541

1455
though she was her best friend and sheM been to a new-
yearseve party and had such a headache she couldn'^t prac-

tice and she^d invited some lovely people in that afternoon
and wouldn’t Mary come, she’d be sure to like them.
    Mary almost hung up on her, Ada sounded so silly, but
she said she’d call her back right awa) after she’d talked
to her mother. It ended by her going home and getting
her best dress on and going uptown to the Plaza to see
judge and Mrs. Blake. She tried to find some place she
could get her hair curled because she knew the first thing
her mother would say was that she looked a fright, but
e’verything was closed on account of its being newyearsday«
    Judge and Mrs. Blake were getting ready to have lunch
in a big private drawingroom on the corner looking out
over the humped snowy hills of the park bristly with bare
branches and interwoven with fastmoving shining streams
of traffic. Mary’s mother didn’t look as if she’d aged a day,
she was dressed in darkgreen and really looked stunning
with a little white ruffle round her neck sitting there so at
her ease, with rings on her fingers that sparkled in the
grey winter light that came in through the big windows.
The judge had a soft caressing voice. He talked elab-
orately about the prodigal daughter and the fatted calf
until her mother broke in to say that they were going
                                      they’d both of them made big kill-
to Europe on a spree 5
ings on the stockexchange on the same day and they felt
they owed themselves a little rest and relaxation. And she
went on about how worried she’d been because all her let-
 ters had been returned from Mary’s last address and that
she’d written Ada again and again and Ada had always
 ^aid Mary was in Pittsburgh or Fall River or some hor-
rible place doing social work and that she felt it was about
time she gave up doing everything for the poor and un*
 fortunate and devoted a little attention to her own kith and.
 kin.
     ‘T hear you are a very dreadful young lady, Mary, my
          <49

1456
dearj” said the judge, blandly, ladling some creamoftoxcry
soup into her plate. hope you didn’t bring any bombs
with you.” They both seemed to think that that was a
splendid joke and laughed and laughed. ^^But to be seri-
ous,” went on the judge, know that social inequality is
a very dreadful thing and a blot on the fair name of
American democracy. But as we get older, my dear, we
learn to live and let live, that we have to take the bad
with the good a little.”
    ^^Mary dear, why don’t you go abroad with Ada Cohn
and have a nice rest?    . . . I’ll find the money for the
trip. I know it’ll do you good. ... You know I’ve never
approved of your friendship with Ada Cohn. Out home
we are probably a little oldfashioned about those things.
Here she seems to be accepted everywhere. In fact she
seems to know all the prominent musical people. Of course
how good a musician she is herself I’m not in a position to
judge.”
    “Hilda dear,” said the judge, “Ada Cohn has a heart
of gold. I find her a very sweet little girl. Her father was
a very distinguished lawyer. You know we decided we’d
lay aside our prejudices a little . . . didn’t we, dear?”
    ^^The judge is reforming me,” laughed Mary’s mother
coyly.
    Mary was so nervous she felt she was going to scream.
 The heavy buttery food, the suave attentions of the waiter
and the fatherly geniality of the judge made her almost
gag. ^^Look, Mother,” she said, ^hf you really have a little
 money to spare you might let me have something for our
 milkfund. After all miners’ children aren’t guilty of any-
thing.”
     ^^My dear, I’ve already made substantial contributions,

 to the Red Cross.    .  . . After all, we’ve had a miners^

 strike out in Colorado on our hands much worse than in
 Pennsylvania. . , I’ve always felt, Mary dear, that if
 you were interested in labor conditions the place for yoM

                                                                                543

1457
was home m Colorado Springs. If you must study that

^ort of thing there was never any need to come East for it.^’
    “Even the LW.W. has reared its ugly head again,” said
the judge.
    “I don’t happen to approve of the tactics of the

I W.W.,” said Mary stiffly.
    “I should hope not,” said her mother.
    “But, Mother, don’t you think you could let me have a
couple of hundred dollars^”
    “To spend on these dreadful agitators, they may not be
I Won’t Works but they’re just as bad.”
    “I’ll promise that every cent goes into milk for the
babies.”
    “But that’s just handing the miners over to these miser-
able Russian agitators. Naturally if they can give milk to
the children it makes them popular, puts them in a position
where they can mislead these poor miserable foreigners
worse than ever.” The judge leaned forward across the
table and put his blueveined hand in its white starched
cuff on Mary’s mother’s hand. “It’s not that we lack sym-
pathy with the plight of the miners’ women and children,
or that we don’t understand the dreadful conditions of the
whole mining industry ... we know altogether too much
about that, don’t we, Hilda? But      .  . .”
    Mary suddenly found that she’d folded her napkin and
gotten trembling to her feet. “I don’t see any reason for
further prolonging this interview, that must be painful to
you, Mother, as it is to me. . . .”
    “Perhaps I can arbitrate,” said the judge, smiling, get-
ting to his feet with his napkin in his hand.
    Mary felt a desperate tight feeling like a metal ring
round her head. “I’ve got to go, Mother ... I don’t
feel very well today. Have a nice trip. ... I don’t want
to argue.” Before they could stop her she was off down
the hall and on her way down in the elevator.
    Mary felt so upset she had to talk to somebody so she
        544

1458
went to a telephone booth and called up Ada. Ada’s voice
was full of sobs, she said something dreadful had hap-
pened and that she’d called off her party and that Mary
must come up to see her immediately. Even before Ada
opened the door of the apartment on Madison Avenue
Mary got a whiff of the Foret Vierge perfume Ada had
taken to using when she first came to New York. Ada
opened the door wearing a green and pink flowered silk
wrapper with all sorts of little tassels hanging from it. She
fell on Mary’s neck. Her eyes were red and she sniffed as
she talked. ^^Why, what’s the matter, Ada?” asked Mary
coolly. ‘^Darling, I’ve just had the most dreadful row
with Hjalmar. We have parted forever. ... Of course I
had to call off the party because I was giving it for him.”
    ^Who’s Hjalmar?”
    ^^He’s somebody very beautiful  .  .  . and very hateful.

.  .  . But let’s talk about you, Mary darling ... I do
hope you’ve made it up with your mother and Judge
Blake.”
          just walked out. .     . . What’s the use of arguing?
They’re on one side of the barricades and Pm on the
other.”
    Ada strode up and down the room. “Oh, I hate talk like

that. ... It makes me feel awful. ... At least you’ll
have a drink. . . . I’ve got to drink, I’ve been too nervous
to practice all day.”
    Mary stayed all afternoon at Ada’s drinking ginrickeys
and eating the sandwiches and little cakes that had been
laid out in the kitchenette for the party and talking about
old times and Ada’s unhappy loveaffair. Ada made Mary
read all his letters and Mary said he was a damn fool and
good riddance. Then Ada cried and Mary told her she
ought to be ashamed of herself, she didn’t know what real
misery was. Ada was very meek about it and went to her
desk and wrote out a check in a shaky hand for a hundred
 dollars for the miners’ milkfund. Ada haa some supper

                                                                                545

1459
sent up for them from the uptown Longchamps and de-
clared she^d spent the happiest afternoon in years. She
made Mary promise to come to her concert in the small

hall at the Aeolian the following week. When Mary was
going Ada made her take a couple of dollars for a taxi.
They were both reeling a little in the hall waiting for the

elevator. ^^WeVe just gotten to be a pair of old topers,”

said Ada gaily. It was a good thing Mary had decided to

take a taxi because she found it hard to stand on her feet.
    That winter the situation of the miners in the Pittsburgh

district got worse and worse. Evictions began. Families
with little children were living in tents and in broken-
down unheated tarpaper barracks. Mary lived in a feeling
of nightmare, writing letters, mimeographing appeals,
making speeches at meetings of clothing and fur workers,
canvassing wealthy liberals. The money that came in was
never enough. She took no salary for her work so she had
to get Ada to lend her money to pay her rent. She was
thin and haggard and coughed all the time. Too many
cigarettes, she’d explain. Eddy Spellman and Rudy Gold-
farb worried about her. She could see they’d decided she
wasn’t eating enough because she was all the time finding
 on the corner of her desk a paper bag of sandwiches or a
 carton of coffee that one of them had brought in. Once
 Eddy brought her a big package of smearcase that his
 mother had made up home near Scranton. She couldn’t eat
 itj she felt guilty every time she saw it sprouting green
mold in the icebox that had no ice in it because she’d given
up cooking now that Don was away.
    One evening Rudy came into the office with smiles all
over his face. Eddy was leaning over packing the old
clothes into bales as usual for his next trip. Rudy gave him
a light kick in the seat of the pants. “Hay you, Trotzky-
ite,” said Eddy, jumping at him and pulling out his neck-
tie. “Smile when you say that,” said Rudy, pummeling
him. They were all laughing. Mary felt like an oldmaid
         546

1460
schoolteacher watching the boys roughhousing in front of
her desk. ^^Meeting comes to order ” she said. ^^They tried
to hang it on me but they couldn't ” said Rudy, panting,
straightening his necktie and his mussed hair. ^^But what I
was going to say. Comrade French, was that I thought
you might like to know that a certain comrade is getting
in on the Aqukama tomorrow . . . tourist class." ^^Rudy,
are you sure?” ^^Saw the cable.”
    Jvlary got to the dock too early and had to wait two
hours. She tried to read the afternoon papers but her eyes
wouldn't follow the print. It was too hot in the reception-
room and too cold outside. She fidgeted around miserably
until at last she saw the enormous black sheetiron wall
sliding with its rows of lighted portholes past the openings
in the wharfbuilding. Her hands and feet were icy. Hef
whole body ached to feel his arms around her, for the
rasp of his deep voice in her ears. All the time a vague
worry flitted in the back of her head because she hadn't
had a letter from him while he'd been away.
    Suddenly there he was coming down the gangplank
alone, with the old wicker suitcase in his hand. He had on
a new belted German raincoat but the same checked cap.
She was face to face with him. He gave her a little hug
but he didn't kiss her. There was something odd in his
voice. ^^Hello, Mary ... 1 didn't expect to find you
here. ... I don't want to be noticed, you know.” His
voice had a low furtive sound in her ears. He was ner-
vously changing his suitcase from one hand to the other.

‘^See you in a few days . .  . I'm going to be pretty busy.”
She turned without a word and ran down the wharf. She
hurried breathless along the crosstown street to the Ninth
Avenue el. When she opened her door the new turkeyred

 curtains were like a blow from a whip in her face.
     She couldn't go back to the ofiice. She couldn't bear the
 thought of facing the boys and the people she knew, the
 people who had known them together. She called up and

                                                                                547

1461
^aid she had a bad case of gnppe and would have to stay

in bed a couple of days. She stayed all day in the blank
misery of the narrow rooms. Towards evening she dozed

off to sleep on the couch. She woke up with a start thinking
she heard a step in the hall outside. It wasn’t Don, the

steps went on up the next flight. After that she didn’t

sleep any more.
    The next morning the phone woke her just when she

settled herself in bed to drowse a little. It was Sylvia
Goldstein saying she was sorry Mary had the grippe and
asking if there was anything she could do. Oh, no, she was

fine, she was just going to stay in bed all day, Mary
answered in a dead voice. ^Well, I suppose you knew all

ihe time about Comrade Stevens and Comrade Lichfield

. ,   . you two were always so close . , . they were mar-
ried in Moscow   .  .  . she’s an English comrade , .      . she
spoke at the big meeting at the Bronx Casino last night

.  .  . she’s got a great shock of red hair . . . stunning but
some of the girls think it’s dyed. Lots of the comrades
didn’t know you and Comrade Stevens had broken up

.  .  . isn’t it sad things like that have to happen in the
movement?” ^‘^Oh, that was a long time ago. . . .
Goodby, Sylvia,” said Mary harshly and hung up. She
called up a bootlegger she knew and told him to send her
up a bottle of gin.
    The next afternoon there was a light rap on the door
and when Mary opened it a crack there was Ada wreathed
in silver fox and breathing out a great gust of Foret
Vierge. ^^Oh, Mary darling, I knew something was the
matter. ... You know sometimes I’m quite psychic. And
when you didn’t come to my concert, first I was mad but
then I said to myself I know the poor darling’s sick. So I
just went right down to your office. There was the hand-
somest boy there and I just made him tell me where you
 lived. He said you were sick with the grippe and so I came
         548

1462
right over. My dear, why arenH you in bed? You look a
slght.^’

             all right,” mumbled Mary numbly, pushing the
stringy hair off her face. been .         . . making plans . .     ,
about how we can handle this relief situation better.”
    ^‘^Well, youVe just coming up right away to my spare
bedroom and let me pet you up a little. ... I don^t be-
lieve it’s grippe, I think it’s overwork. ... If you’re not
careful you’ll be having a nervous breakdown.” ^^Maybe
sumpen like that.” Mary couldn’t articulate her words.
She didn’t seem to have any will of her own any more;
she did everything Ada told her. When she was settled in
Ada’s clean lavendersmelling spare bed they sent out for
some barbital and it put her to sleep, Mary stayed there
several days eating the meals Ada’s maid brought her,
drinking all the drinks Ada would give her, listening to
the continual scrape of violin practice that came from the
other room all morning. But at night she couldn’t sleep
without filling herself up with dope. She didn’t seem to
have any will left. It would take her a half an hour to
decide to get up to go to the toilet.
    After she’d been at Ada’s a week she began to feel she
ought to go home. She began to be impatient of Ada’s sly
references to unhappy loveaffairs and broken hearts and
the beauty of abnegation and would snap Ada’s head off
whenever she started it. ^‘^That’s fine,” Ada would say.
^^You are getting your meanness back.” For some time Ada
had been bringing up the subject of somebody she knew
who’d been crazy about Mary for years and who was dying
 to see her again. Finally Mary gave m and said she would
 go to a cocktail party at Eveline Johnson’s where Ada said
 she knew he’d be. ^^And Eveline gives the most wonderful
 parties. I don’t know how she does it because she never has
 any money, but all the most interesting people in New
 York will be there. They always are. Radicals too, you
 know. Eveline can’t live without her little group of reds,”

                                                                                549

1463
    Mary wore one of Ada^s dresses that didn’t fit her very
well and went out in the morning to have her hair curled

at Saks’s where Ada always had hers curled. They had
some cocktails at Ada’s place before they went. At the last
minute Mary said she wouldn’t go because she’d finally
got It out of Ada that it was George Barrow who was going
to be at the party. Ada made Mary drink another cocktail
and a reckless feeling came over her and she said all right,

let’s get a move on.
    There was a smiling colored maid in a fancy lace cap
and apron at the door of the house who took them down
the hall to a bedroom full of coats and furs where they
were to take off their wraps. As Ada was doing her face at
the dressingtable Mary whispered in her ear, ^^Just think
what our reliefcommittee could do with the money that
woman wastes on senseless entertaining.” “But she’s a
darling,” Ada whispered back excitedly. “Honestly, you’ll
like her.” The door had opened behind their backs letting
in a racketing gust of voices, laughs, tinkle of glasses, a
whiff of perfume and toast and cigarettesmoke and gin.
“Oh, Ada,” came a ringing voice. “Eveline darling, how
lovely you look.    . ,   . This is Mary French, you know I
said I’d bring her.      .  .  . She’s my oldest friend.” Mary
found herself shaking hands with a tkll slender woman in
a pearlgrey dress. Her face was very white and her lips
were very red and her long large eyes were exaggerated
with mascara. “So nice of you to come,” Eveline Johnson
said and sat down suddenly among the furs and wraps on
the bed. “It sounds like a lovely party,” cried Ada.
    “I hate parties. I don’t know why I give them,” said
Eveline Johnson. “Well, I guess I’ve got to go back to the
menagerie. . . . Oh, Ada, I’m so tired.”
    Mary found herself studying the harsh desperate lines
under the makeup round Mrs. Johnson’s mouth and the
strained tenseness of the cords of her neck. Their silly life
tells on them, she was saying to herself.
         55c

1464
    ^^What about the play?” Ada was asking. was so ex-
cited when I heard about it.”
    ^^Oh, thafs ancient history now,” said Eveline Johnson
sharply.           W'orkmg on a plan to bring over the ballet

* .  . turn it into something American. . ,        . Pll tell you
about it some time.”
    ^^Oh, Eveline, did the screenstar come^” asked Ada,
giggling.
    ^^Oh, yes, they always come.” Eveline Johnson sighed.
‘^^She’s beautiful. ... You must meet her.”
    “Of course anybody in the world would come to youi
parties, Eveline.”
    “I don^t know why they should . . . they seem just too
boring to me.” Eveline Johnson was ushering them
through some sliding doors into a highceilinged room
dusky from shaded lights and cigarettesmoke where they
were swallowed up in a jam of welldressed people talking
and making faces and tossing their heads over cocktail
glasses. There seemed no place to stand so Mary sat down
at the end of a couch beside a little marbletopped table.
The other people on the couch were jabbering away among
themselves and paid no attention to her. Ada and the
hostess had disappeared behind a wall of men^s suits and
afternoongowns.
    Mary had had time to smoke an entire cigarette before
Ada came back followed by George Barrow, whose thin
face looked flushed and whose adamsapple stuck out fur-
ther than ever over his collar. He had a cocktail in each
hand. “Well well well, little Mary French, after all these
years,” he was saying with a kind of forced jollity. “If
you knew the trouble weM had getting these through the
crush.”
     “Hello, George,” said Mary casually. She took the cock-

 tail he handed her and drank it off. After the other drinks
 she’d had it made her head spin. Somehow George and
 Ada managed to squeeze themselves in on the couch on

                                                                                5SI

1465
cither side of Mary.          want to hear all about the coal-
stnke,” George was saying, knitting his brows. ^^Too bad
the insurgent locals had to choose a moment when a strike
played right into the operators^ hands.” Mary got angry.
“That’s just the sort of remark Pd expect from a man of
your sort. If we waited for a favorable moment there
wouldn’t be any strikes.    .     . There never is any favor-
able moment for the workers.”
    “What sort of a man is a man of my sort?^” said George
Barrow with fake humility, so Marj^ thought. “That’s
what I often ask myself.” “Oh, I don’t want to argue .        . .
Pm sick and tired of arguing. .     .  . Get me another cock-

tail, George.”
    He got up obediently and started threading his way
across the room. “Now, Mary, don’t row with poor
George. . . . He’s so sweet.     . . . Do you know, Margo
Dowling really is here . . . and her husband and Rodney
Cathcart  .  .  . they’re always together. They’re on their
way to the Riviera,” Ada talked into her ear in a loud
stage whisper. “I’m sick of seeing movie actors on the
screen,” said Mary, “I don’t want to see them in real life.’^
    Ada had slipped away. George was back with two more
cocktails and a plate of cold salmon and cucumbers. She
wouldn’t eat anything. “Don’t you think you’d better, with
all the drinks?” She shook her head. “Well, I’ll eat it
myself. ... You know, Mary,” he went on, “I often
wonder these days if I wouldn’t have been a happier man
if I’d just stayed all my life an expressagent in South
Chicago and married some nice workinggirl and had a
flock of kids. ... I’d be a wealthier and a happier man
  oday if I’d gone into business even.” “Well, you don’t
 took so badly off,” said Mary. “You know it hurts me to
be attacked as a laborfaker by you reds.     . .  . may be-
lieve in compromise but I’ve gained some verv substantial
 dollarsandcents victories. . . . What you communists
 won’t see is that there are sometimes two sides to a case.”

         552

1466
             not a partymember,” said Mary,
          know  .  . . but you work with them. ,            .  . Why
should you think you know better what’s good for the
miners than their own tried and true leaders?”               the
miners ever had a chance to vote in their unions you’d
£nd out how much they trust your sellout crowd.”
                                                                                       just
    George Barrow shook his head. ^^Mary, Mary .   . .
the same headstrong warmhearted girl.”
    ^^Rubbishj I haven’t any feelings at all any more. Pvfi
seen how it works in the field. ... It doesn’t take a good
heart to know which end of a riotgun’s pointed at you.”
    ^^Mary, I’m a very unhappy man.”
    ^^Get me another cocktail, George.”
    Mary had time to smoke two cigarettes before George
came back. The nodding jabbering faces, the dresses, the
gestures with hands floated in a smoky haze before her
eyes. The crowd was beginning to thin a little when
George came back all flushed and smiling. ^Well, I had
the pleasure of exchanging a few words with Miss Dowl-
ing, she was most charming.  .  . . But do you know what
Red Haines tells me? I wonder if it’s true. ... It seems
                         it seems that she’s no
she’s through 5                                     good for talkmgpic-
tures  .  .  . voice sounds like the croaking of an old crow
over the loudspeaker,” he giggled a little drunkenly.
‘^^There she is now, she’s just leaving.”
    A hush had fallen over the room. Through the dizzy
swirl of cigarettesmoke Mary saw a small woman with
blue eyelids and features regular as those of a porcelaii?^
 doll under a mass of paleblond hair turn for a second to
 smile at somebody before she went out through the sliding
 doors. She had on a yellow dress and a lot of big sapphires.
 A tall bronzefaced actor and a bowlegged sallowfaced little
 man followed her out, and Eveline Johnson talking and
 talking in her breathless hectic way swept after them.
     Mary was looking at it all through a humming haze like
 seeing a play from way up in a smoky balcony, Ada cam/i

                                                                                553

1467
and stood in front of het rolling her eyes and opening her
mouth wide when she talked. ^^Ohj isn’t it a wonderful
party, . . , 1 met her. She had the loveliest manners . . ,

I don’t know why, I expected her to be kmda tough.
They say she came from the gutter.”
    ^^Not at all,” said George. ^^Her people were Spaniards
of noble birth who lived in Cuba.”
    ^^Ada, I want to go home,” said Mary.
    ^^Just a minute ... I haven’t had a chance to talk to
dear Eveline. . . . She looks awfully tired and nervous
today, poor dear.” A lilypale young man brushed past
them laughing over his shoulder at an older woman cov-
ered with silver lame who followed him, her scrawny neck,
wattled under the powder, thrust out and her hooknose
quivering and eyes bulging over illconcealed pouches.
    ^^Ada, I want to go home.”
         thought you and I and George might have dinner
together.” Mary was seeing blurred faces getting big as
they came towards her, changing shape as they went past,
fading into the gloom like fish opening and closing their
mouths in an aquarium.
    “How about iO Miss Cohn, have you seen Charles Ed-
ward Holden around^ He’s usually quite a feature of Eve-
line’s parties.” Mary hated George Barrow’s doggy pop-
eyed look when he talked. “Now there’s a sound intel-
ligent fellow for you. I can talk to him all night.”
    Ada narrowed her eyes as she leaned over and whis-
pered shrilly in George Barrow’s ear. “He’s engaged to
be married to somebody else. Eveline’s cut up about it..
She’s just living on her nerve.”
    “George, if we’ve got to stay . . Mary said, “get me
another cocktail.”
    A broadfaced woman in spangles with very red cheeks
who was sitting on the couch beside Mary leaned across
and said in a stage whisper, “Isn’t it dreadful?      . . . You
know I think it’s most ungrateful of Holdy after all Eve-
         554

1468
line’s done for him ... in a social way . . . since she
took him up    .  . . now he’s accepted everywhere. I know
the girl ... a little bitch if there ever was one . .             . not
even wealthy.”
    “Shush/’ said Ada. “Here’s Eveline now.        .  .  . Well,
Eveline dear, the captains and the kings depart. Soon
there’ll be nothing but us smallfry left.”
    “She didn’t seem awful bright to me,” said Eveline,
dropping into a chair beside them. “Let me get you a
drink, Eveline dear,” said Ada. Eveline shook her head.
^What you need, Eveline, my dear,” said the broadfaced
woman, leaning across the couch again,        .  . is a good
trip abroad. New York’s impossible after January ... I
shan’t attempt to stay. ... It would just mean a nervous
breakdown if I did.”
    “I thought maybe I might go to Morocco sometime if

I could scrape up the cash,” said Eveline.
    “Try Tunis, my dear. Tunis is divine.”
    After she’d drunk the cocktail Barrow brought Mary sat
there seeing faces, hearing voices in a blank hateful haze.

 It took all her attention not to teeter on the edge of the
couch. “I really must go.” She had hold of George’s arm
crossing the room. She could walk very well but she
couldn’t talk very well. In the bedroom Ada was helping
her on with her coat. Eveline Johnson was there with her
big hazel eyes and her teasing singsong voice. “Oh, Ada,

 it was sweet of you to come. I’m afraid it was just too
 boring. . .    . Oh, Miss French, I so wanted to talk to you
 about the miners ... I never get a chance to talk about
 things I’m really interested in any more. Do you know,
 Ada, I don’t think I’ll ever do this again. . , . It’s just

 too boring.” She put her long hand to her temple and
 rubbed the fingers slowly across her forehead. “Oh, Ada,

  I hope they go home soon. . . . I’ve got such a head-
 ache.”
      “Oughtn’t you to take something for it?”

1469
     "I will. IVe got a wonderful painkiller. Ask me up next
Ume you play Bachj Ada . . . Pd like that. You know it
does seem too silly to spend your life filling up rooms with
illassorted people who really hate each other.^’ Eveline
Johnson followed them all the way down the hall to the
front door as if she didn^t want to let them go. She stood
]n her thin dress in the gust of cold wind that came from
the open door while George Avent to the corner to get a
rab. “EvelinCj go back in, you^ll catch your death/^ said
Ada. “Well, goodby ,     . . you were darlings to come.^^ As
vhe door closed slowly behind her Mary watched Eveline
Johnson^s narrow shoulders. She was shivering as she
walked back down the hall.
    Mary reeled, suddenly feeling drunk in the cold air and
Ada put her arm round her to steady her. “Oh, Mary,”
Ada said in her ear, “I wish everybody wasn^t so un-
happy.”
    “IPs the waste,” Mary cried out savagely, suddenly able
to articulate. Ada and George Barrow were helping her
into the cab. “The food they waste and the money they
waste while our people starve in tarpaper barracks.” “The
contradictions of capitalism,” said George Barrow with a
knowing leer. “How about a bite to eat?”
    “Take me home first. No, not to Ada’s,” Mary almost
yelled. “I’m sick of this parasite life. I’m going back to the
office tomorrow.   . . . I’ve got to call up tonight to see if
they got in all right with that load of condensed
milk.   .  .       She picked up Ada’s hand, suddenly feeling
like old times again, and squeezed it. “Ada, you’ve been
sweet, honestly you’ve saved my life.”
    “Ada’s the perfect cure for hysterical people like us,”
said George Bairow. The taxi had stopped beside the row
of garbagecans in front of the house where Mary lived.
“No, I can walk up alone,” she said harshly and angrily
again. “IPs just that being tiredout a drink makes me feel
funny. Goodnight. I’ll get my bag at your place tomor-
         556

1470
row.^^ Ada and Barrow went off in the taxicab with their
heads together chatting and laughing. They’ve forgotten
me already, thought Mary as she made her way up the
stairs. She made the stairs all right but had some trouble
getting the key in the lock. When the door finally would
open she went straight to the couch in the front room and
lay down and fell heavily asleep.
    In the morning she felt more rested than she had in
years. She got up early and ate a big breakfast with baco
and eggs at Childs on the way to the office. Rudy Gok
farb was already there, sitting at her desk.
    He got up and stared at her without speaking for
moment. His eyes were red and bloodshot and his usually
sleek black hair was all over his forehead. “What’s th«i
matter, Rudy?”
    “Comrade French, they got Eddy.”
    “You mean they arrested him.”
    “Arrested him nothing, they shot him.”
    “They killed him.” Mary felt a wave of nausea rising
in her. The room started to spin around. She clenched hef

fists and the room fell into place again. Rudy was telling
her how some miners had found the truck wrecked in a
ditch. At first they thought that it had been an accident
but when they picked up Eddy Spellman he had a bullet-
hole through his temple.
    “WeVe got to have a protest meeting ... do they
know about it over at the Party?”
    “Sure, they’re trying to get Madison Square Garden
But, Comrade French, he was one hell of a swell kid.
Mary was shaking all over. The phone rang. Rudy an
swered it. “Comrade French, they want you over there

right away. They want you to be secretary of th
mittee for the protest meeting.” Mary let herself drop inco

the chair at her desk for a moment and began noting dowr.

the names of organizations to be notified. Suddenly she
looked up and looked Rudy straight in the eye. “Do you

                                                                               557

1471
know what weVe got to do . . . weVe got to move the
reliefcommittee to Pittsburgh. I knew all along we ought
to have been in Pittsburgh.'’
    ^^Risky business.”
    “We ought to have been in Pittsburgh all along,” Mary
raid firmly and quietly.
    The phone rang again.
    “It’s somebody for you, Comrade French.”
    As soon as the receiver touched Mary’s ear there was
Ada talking and talking. At first Mary couldn’t make out

svhat it was about. “But, Mary darling, haven’t you read
the papers?” “No, I said I hadn’t. You mean about Eddy
Spellman^” “No, darling, it’s too awful, you remember
we were just there yesterday for a cocktail party   . . . you
must remember, Eveline Johnson, it’s so awful. I’ve sent
out and got all the papers. Of course the tabloids all say

it’s suicide.” “Ada, I don’t understand.” “But, Mary, I’m
trying to tell you . . . I’m so upset I can’t talk . . . she
was such a lovely woman, so talented, an artist really.

. . . Well, when the maid got there this morning she
found her dead in her bed and we were just there twelve
hours before. It gives me the horrors. Some of the papers
say it was an overdose of a sleeping medicine. She couldn’t
have meant to do it. If we’d only known we might have
been able to do something, you know she said she had a
headache. Don’t you think you could come up, I can’t stay
here alone i teei so terrible.” “Ada, I can’t. .          . . Some-
thing very serious has happened in Pennsylvania. I have
a great deal of work to do organizing a protest. Goodby,
Ada.” Mary hung up, frowning.
    “Say, Rudy, if Ada Cohn calls up again tell her I’m out
 of the office. ... I have too much to do to spend my
 time taking care of hysterical women a day like this.” She
 put on her hat, collected her papers, and hurried over to
 the meeting of the committee.

          Sl8

1472
                                                                                VA(j


        The young man waits at the edge of the concrete,
with one hand he grips a rubbed suitcase of phony
leather, the other hand almost making a fist, thumb up
        that moves in ever so slight an arc when a car
slithers past, a truck roars clatters; the wind of cars
passing ruffles his hair, slaps grit in his face.
        Head swims, hunger has twisted the belly tight,
        he has skinned a heel through the torn sock, feet
ache in the broken shoes, under the threadbare suit care-
fully brushed off with the hand, the torn drawers have
a crummy feel, the feel of having slept in your clothes;
in the nostrils lingers the staleness of discouraged car-
casses crowded into a transient camp, the carbolic stench
of the jail, on the taut cheeks the shamed flush from the
boring eyes of cops and deputies, railroadbulls (they eat
three squares a day, they are buttoned into wellmade
clothes, they have wives to sleep with, kids to play with
after supper, they work for the big men who buy their
way, they stick their chests out with the sureness of
power behind their backs). Git the hell out, scram.
Know what’s good for you, you’ll make yourself scarce.

Gittin’ tough, eh? Think you kin take it, eh?
         The punch in the jaw, the slam on the head with
the nightstick, the wrist grabbed and twisted behind
the back, the big knee brought up sharp into the crotch,
         the walk out of town with sore feet to stand and
wait at the edge of thfe hissing speeding string of cars
 where the reek of ether and lead and gas melts into the

 silent grassy smell of the earth.
         Eyes black with want seek out the eyes ofrthe

drivers, a hitch, a hundred miles down the road.           '

         Overhead in the blue a plane drones. Eyes follow

                                                                                559

1473
the silver Dougia'^^ thiit flashes once in the bun and
bores its sraocth way out of sight into the blue.
         (The tianscontinental passengers sit pretty, big
men with bankaccounts, highlypaid jobs, who are saluted
by doorxuen, telephonegirls say goodmorning to them.
Last night after a fine dinner, drinks with friends, they

left J'fewark. Roar of climbing motors slanting up into
the inky haze. Lights drop away. An hour staring
along a silvery wing at a big lonesome moon hurrying
West through curdling scum. Beacons flash in a line
across Ohio.
         At Cleveland the plane drops banking in a smooth
spiral, the string of lights along the lake swings in a
                                                                           slumped in
circle. Climbing roar of the motors again j
the soft seat drowsing through the flat moonlight night.
         Chi. A glimpse of the dipper. Another spiral
swoop from cool into hot air thick with dust and the
reek of burnt prairies.
         Beyond the Mississippi dawn creeps up behind
through the murk over the great plains. Puddles of
mist go white in the Iowa hills, farms, fences, silos,
steel glint from a river. The blinking eyes of the bea-
cons reddening into day. Watercourses vein the eroded
hills.
         Omaha. Great cumulus clouds, from coppery
churning to creamy to silvery white, trail brown skirts of
rain over the hot plains. Red and yellow badlands,
tiny horned shapes of cattle.
         Cheyenne. The cool high air smells of sweetgrass.
         The tightbaled clouds to westward burst and scat-
 ter in tatters over the strawcolored hills. Indigo mour
 tains jut rimrock. The plane breasts a huge crumbling
 cloudbank and toboggans over bumpy air across green
 and crimson slopes into the sunny dazzle of Salt Lake.
         The transcontinental passenger thinks contracts,
 profits, vacationtrips, mighty continent between Atlantic
          560

1474
                                                                         ;





and Pacific, power, wires humming dollars, cities
jammed, hills empty, the indiantrail leading into the
wagonroad, the macadamed pike, the concrete skyway;
trains, planes : history the billiondollar speedup,
        and in the bumpy air over the desert ranges to-
wards Las Vegas
        sickens and vomits into the carton container the
steak and mushrooms he ate in New York. No matter,
silver in the pocket, greenbacks in the wallet, drafts,
certified checks, plenty restaurants in L. A.)
        The young man waits on the side of the road; the
plane has gone; thumb moves in a small arc when a
car tears hissing past. Eyes seek the driver’s eyes. A
hundred miles down the road. Head swims, belly
tightens, wants crawl over his skin like ants:
        went to school, books said opportunity, ads prom-
ised speed, own your home, shine bigger than your
neighbor, the fadiocrooner whispered girls, ghosts of
platinum girls coaxed from the screen, millions in win-
nings were chalked up on the boards in the offices, pay-
checks were for hands willing to work, the cleared desk
of an executive with three telephones on it
         waits with swimming head, needs knot the belly,
idle hands numb, beside the spec ding traffic.
         A hundred miles down the "oad.

