
NINETEEN-NINETEEN

436
                                                                                                     1



                                                                     CONTENTS

NEWSREEL XX Oh th& injantree the injantree                          j
JOE WILLIAMS                                                                           4
The Camera Eye (28) when the telegram came that
        she was dying
                                                                                                    g
PLAYBOY                                                                                  12

JOE WILLIAMS                                                                         17

NEWSREEL XXI Goodby Broadway ; Hello France                 70

The Camera Eye (29) the raindrops fall one by one
         out of the horsechestnut tree                                            7

 RICHARD ELLSWORTH SAVAGE                                          72

 NEWSREEL XXII Coming Year Promises Rebirth of
         Railroads                                                                        100

The Camera Eye (30) remembering the grey crooked
         fingers                                                                             10?

 RANDOLPH BOURNE                                                           103

 NEWSREEL XXIII If you dofit like your Uncle Satnany 106

 EVELINE HUTCHINS                                                             107

 The Camera Eye (31) a mattress covered with some-
         thing from Vantine’s                                                        126

 EVELINE HUTCHINS                                                             128

 NEWSREEL XXIV it is difficult to realize the colossal

          scale                                                                               139

 The Camera Eye (32) a quatorze heures precisement 14G

                                                                                            V

437
                                                                                                     1



 THE HAPPY WARRIOR                                                         142

The Camera Eye (33) ii,000 registered harlots                        148

JOE WILLIAMS                                                                        15

The Camera Eye (34) his voice was three thousand
         miles away                                                                      1 74

NEWSREEL XXV General Pershing’s forces today occu-
         pied                                                                                 177

 i HOOSIER QUIXOTE                                                            178

NEWSREEL XXVI Europe on Knife Edge                               184

RICHARD ELLSWORTH SAVAGE                                         186

NEWSREEL XXVII Her Wounded Hero of War a Fraud 213

 The Camera Eye (35) there were always two cats                 215

 EVELINE HUTCHINS                                                             216

NEWSREEL XXVIII Oh the eagles they fly high                      229

JOE WILLIAMS                                                                        230

NEWSREEL xxix the arrival of the news                                 238

The Camera Eye (36) when we emptied the rosies                240
MEESTER VEELSON                                                             241

NEWSREEL XXX Monster Guns Removed?                          251

The Camera Eye (37) alphabetically according to rank 252

NEWSREEL XXXI washing and dressing hastily                    255
DAUGHTER                                                                            256

NEWSREEL xxxn Golden Voice of Caruso Sings to
         Crowds in Streets                                                           286

         VI

438
The Camera Eye (38) sealed signed and delivered               288

NEWSREEL xxxiii Cant Recall Killing Sister                          289

EVELINE HUTCHINS                                                             291

newsreel XXXIV Whole World is Short of Platinum 334
THE HOUSE OF MORGAN                                                    335

newsreel XXXV The Grand Prix de la Victoire                        340

The Camera Eye (39) daylight enlarges out of                       342

NEWSREEL XXXVI To the Glory of France Eternal               344

RICHARD ELLSWORTH SAVAGE                                         346

    i
NEWSREEL XXXVII Soviet Guards Displaced                       398

The Camera Eye (40) I walked all over town                          400

 NEWSREEL XXXVIII C^est la lutte finale                              402

 DAUGHTER                                                                           404

 NEWSREEL XXXIX Spectacle of ruined villages and tor-
         tured earth                                                                      4^8

 The Camera Eye (41) arent you coming to the an-

         archist picnic                                                                   4^9

 NEWSREEL XL Criminal m Pyjamas Saws Bars                   42 1

 JOE HILL                                                                                421

 BEN COMPTON                                                                     423

 NEWSREEL XLl in British Colonial Office quarters                452

 The Camera Eye (42) four hours we casuals pile up

          scrapiron                                                                        453

439
NEWSREEL XLII It was a gala day for Seattle                       455

PAULBUNYAISI                                                                      456
RICHARD ELLSWORTH SAVAGE                                        461

NEWSREEL XLIII the placards borne by tire radicals            466
THE BODY OF AN AMERICAN                                             467

440
                                                         NEWSREEL XX


                         Oh the injantree the injantree
                         With the dirt behind their ears

ARMIES CLASH AT VERDUN IN GLOBE’S
                           GREATEST BATTLE

              150,000 MEN AND WOMEN PARADE

        but another question and a very important one is raised.
The New York Stock Exchange is today the only free secuntiet
market in the world. If it maintains that position it is sure tc
become perhaps the world’s greatest center for the marketing of

             BRITISH FLEET SENT TO SEIZE
                                GOLDEN HORN

                          The cavalree artilleree
                          And the goddamned engineers
                          Will never heat the injantree
                          In eleven thousand years

        TURKS FLEE BEFORE TOMMIES AT
                                      GALLIPOLI

         when they return home what will our war veterans think
of the American who babbles about some vague new order,
while dabbling in the sand of shoal water? From his weak
foUy they who have lived through the spectacle will recall the
vast new No Man’s Land of Europe reeking with murder and
the lust of rapine, aflame with the fires of revolution

       STRIKING WAITERS ASK AID OF WOMEN
          Oh the oak and the ash and the weefing willow tree
         And green grows the grass in North Amerikee

         coincident with a position of that kind will be the bringing
 from abroad of vast quantities of money for the purposes ol
 maintaining balances in this country

                                                                                            3

441
        When I think of the flag which our shifs carry^ the only

touch of color about therriy the only thing that moves as if it
                                                                                seems to
had a settled sprit in ity—in their solid structure ^
me I see alternate strip of farchment ufon which arc written

the rights of liberty and justice and strifs of blood sfilt to vindi’-

cate these rightsj, and then^—in the corner a frediction of the
blue serene into which ‘^very nation may swim which stands
for these things.

           Oh weHl nail Old Glory to the tof of the foie
           dnd we^ll all reenlist in the fig^s a—h—




                                                      [OE WILLIAMS


   Joe Williams put on the secondhand suit and dropped
his uniform, with a cobblestone wrapped up in it, off the
edge of the dock into the muddy water of the basin. It
was noon. There was nobody around. He felt bad when
he found he didn’t have the cigarbox with him. Back in
the shed he found it where he’d left it. It was a box that
had once held Flor de Mayo cigars he’d bought when he
was drunk in Guantanamo. In the box under the gold-
paper lace were Janey’s high school graduation picture, a
snapshot of Alec with his motorcycle, a picture with the
signatures of the coach and all the players of the whole
highschool junior team that he was captain of all in base-
ball clothes, an old pink almost faded snapshot of his
Dad’s tug, the Mary B, Sullivan, taken off the Virginia
Capes with a fullrigged ship in tow, an undressed post-
card picture of a girl named Antoinette he’d been with in
Villefranche, some safetyrazor blades, a postcard photo
of himself and two other guys, all gobs in white suits,
token against the background of a moorish arch in Malaga,
        4

442
a bunch of foreign stamps, a package of Mert^ Widows,
and ten little pink and red shells he’d picked up on the
beach at Santiago. With the box tucked right under his
arm, feeling crummy in the baggy civics, he walked slowly
out to the beacon and watched the fleet in formation
                                                                                       the
steaming down the River Plate. The day was overcast j
lean cruisers soon blurred into their trailing smoke-
smudges.
    Joe stopped looking at them and watched a rusty tramp
come in. She had a heavy list to port and you could see
the hull below the waterline green and slimy with weed.
There was a blue and white Greek flag on the stern and a
dingy yellow quarantine flag halfway up the fore.
    A man who had come up behind him said something
to Joe in Spanish. He was a smiling ruddy man in blue
denims and was smoking a cigar, but for some reason he
made Joe feel panicky. ^^No savvy,” Joe said and walked
away and out between the warehouses into the streets back
of the waterfront.
    He had trouble finding Maria’s place, all the blocks
looked so much alike. It was by the mechanical violin in
the window that he recognized it Once he got inside the
stuffy anisesmelling dump he stood a long time at the bar
with one hand round a sticky beerglass looking out at the
street he could see in bright streaks through the bead-
curtain that hung in the door. Any minute he expected
the white uniform and yellow holster of a marine to go
past.
    Behind the bar a yellow youth with a crooked nose
leaned against the wall looking at nothing. When Joe
made up his mind he jerked his chin up. The youth came
over and craned confidentially across the bar, leaning on
one hand and swabbing at the oilcloth with the rag he held
in the other. The flies that had been grouped on the
rings left by beerglasses on the oilcloth flew up to join

443
 the buzzing mass on the ceiling.              bo, tell Maria I
 want to see her/^ Joe said out of the comer of his mouth.
 The youth behind the bar held up two fingers. ^^Dos
 pesos, he said. ^^Hell, no, I only want to talk to her.”
     Maria beckoned to him from the door in back. She was
 a sallow woman with big eyes set far apart in bluish

 sacks. Through the crumpled pink dress tight over the
 bulge of her breasts Joe could make out the rings of
 crinkled flesh round the nipples. They sat down at a table
 in the back room. ^^Gimme two beers,” Joe yelled through
 the door.

t ^^Watta you wan^, iho de mi alma?” asked Maria. ^^You
 savvy Doc Sidner?” ^^Sure me savvy all yanki. Watta you
 wan’ you no go wid beeg sheep?” ^‘^No go wid beeg
 sheep . . . Fight wid beeg sonofabeech, see?”
     ^^Che!” Maria’s breasts shook like jelly when she
 laughed. She put a fat hand at the back of his neck and
 drew his face towards hers. ^Toor baby .    . . black eye.”
 ^^Sure he gave me a black eye.” Joe pulled away from her.
 ‘Tetty oflicer. I knocked him cold, see . .          . Navy’s no
 place for me after that . . . I’m through. Say, Doc said
 you knew a guy could fake A.B. certificates . . . able sea-
 man savvy? Me for the Merchant Marine from now on,
  Maria.”
     Joe drank down his beer.
                                                                               pobrecito
     She sat shaking her head saying, ^^Che . . .

  , . . Che.” Then she said in a tearful voice, ’Ow much
 dollars you got?” ^^Twenty,” said Joe. ^^Heem want fif-
 tee.”       guess I’m f—d for fair then.”
     Maria walked round to the back of his chair and put a
 fat arm round his neck, leaning over him with little cluck-
  ing noises. ^Wait a minute, we tink .   .  , sabes?” Her big
  breast pressing against his neck and shoulder made him
                   he didn’t like her touching him in the morning
  feel itchy 5
  when he was sober like this. But he sat there until she
  suddenly let out a parrot screech. “Paquito . . . ven aca.”
          6

444
   A dirty pearshaped man with a red face and neck cam^s
in from the back. They talked Spanish over Joe^s head.
At last she patted his cheek and said, ^^Awright Paquito
sabe where heem live . . . maybe heem take twenty,
sabes?”
    Joe got to his feet, Paquito took oiff the smudged cook’s
apron and lit a cigarette. ^^You savvy A.B. papers?” said Joe
walking up and facing him. He nodded, ^^Awright.” Joe
gave Maria a hug and a little pinch. You’re a good girl,
Maria.” She followed them grinning to the door of the
bar.
    Outside Joe looked sharply up and down the street.
Not a uniform. At the end of the street a crane tilted
black above the cement warehouse buildings. They got on
a streetcar and rode a long time without saying anything.
 Joe sat staring at the floor with his hands dangling be-
 tween his knees until Paquito poked him. They got out in
 a cheaplooking suburban section of new cement houses
 already dingy. Paquito rang at a door like all the other
 doors and after a while a man with redrimmed eyes and
 big teeth like a horse came and opened it. He and Paquito
 talked Spanish a long while through the halfopen door.
 Joe stood first on one foot and then on the other. He
 could tell that they were sizing up how much they could
 get out of him by the way they looked at him sideways as
 they talked.
     He was just about to break in when the man in the
 door spoke to him in cracked cockney. ^^You give the
 blighter five pesos for his trouble, mytey, an’ we’ll settle

 this hup between wahte men.” Joe shelled out what silver
  he had in bis pocket and Paquito went.
     Joe followed the limey into the front hall that smelt
  of cabbage and frying grease and wash day. When he got
  )nside he put his hand on Joe’s shoulder and said, blowing
  stale whiskeybreath in his face, ^Well, mytey, ’ow much
  tan you afford?” Joe drew away. ^^Twenty American

                                                                                    7

445
doUars’s all I got ” he said through his teeth. The limey
shook his head, ^^Only four quid . . . well, there’s no
’arm in seein’ what we can do, is there, mytey? Let’s see

it.” While the limey stood looking at him Joe took off his

belt, picked out a couple of stitches with the small blade of

his jackknife and pulled out two orangebacked American

bills folded long. He unfolded them carefully and was
about to hand them over when he thought better of it and
put them in his pocket. ^‘Now let’s take a look at the
paper,” he said grinning.
                                                                                he said
    The limey’s redrimmed eyes looked tearful 5
we ought to be ’elpful one to another and gryteful when
a bloke risked a forger’s hend to ’elp ’is fellow creatures.
Then he asked Joe his name, age and birthplace, how
long he’d been to sea and all that and went into an inside
room, carefully locking the door after him.
   Joe stood in the hall. There was a clock ticking some-
where. The ticks dragged slower and slower. At last Joe
heard the key turn in the lock and the limey came out with
two papers in his hand. ^^You oughter realize what I’m
doin’ for yez, mytey. . . Joe took the paper. He wrin-
                                                     looked all right to him.
kled his forehead and studied it 5
The other paper was a note authorizing Titterton’s Marine
Agency to garnishee Joe’s pay monthly until the sum of
ten pounds had been collected. ^^But look here you,” he
said, ‘^that makes seventy dollars I’m shelling out.” The
limey said think of the risk he was tyking and ’ow times
was ’ard and that arfter all he could tyke it or leave it.
Joe followed him into the paperlittered inside room and
leaned over the desk and signed with a fountain pen.
   They went downtown on the streetcar and got off at
Rivadavia Street. Joe followed the limey into a small
office back of a warehouse. ’Ere’s a smart young ’and for
you, Mr. McGregor,” the limey said to a biliouslooking
Scotchman who was walking up and down chewing his
nails.

446
   Joe and Mr. McGregor looked at each other. ^^Ameri-^
can?” “Yes.” “You’re not expectin’ American pay I’m
supposin’?”
    The limey went up to him and whispered somethings
McGregor looked at the certificate and seemed satisfied.
“All right, sign in the book. , , . Sign under the last
name.” Joe signed and handed the limey the twenty dol-
lars. That left him flat. “Well, cheeryoh, mytey.” Joe
hesitated a moment before he took the limey’s hand. “So
long,” he said.
    “Go get your dunnage and be back here in an hour,”
said McGregor in a rasping voice. “Haven’t got any dun--
nage. I’ve been on the beach,” said Joe, weighing the
cigarbox in his hand. “Wait outside then and I’ll take you
aboard the Argyle by and by.” Joe stood for a while in
the warehouse door looking out into the street. Hell, he’d
seen enough of B.A. He sat on a packingcase marked Tib-
bett & Tibbett, Enameled Ware, Blackpool, to wait for
Mr. McGregor, wondering if he was the skipper or the
mate. Time sure would drag all right till he got out of
BA^




                              THE CAMERA EYE (28)


        when the telegram came that she was dying (the

streetcarwheels screeched round the bellglass like all the

pencils on all the slates in all the schools) walking around

Fresh Pond the smell of puddlewater willowbuds in the

 raw wind shrieking streetcarwheels rattling on loose trucks

through the Boston suburbs             grief isnt a uniform

                                                                                   9

447
aiid go shock the Booch and drink wine for supper at the

Lenox before catching the Federal
                          Pm so tired of violets

                           Take them all away

       when the telegram came that she was dying the bell-

glass cracked In a screech of slate pencils (have you ever

                                                                                and He
never been able to sleep for a week in April? )
met me In the grey tralnshed my eyes were stinging with

Vermillion bronze and chromegreen Inks that oozed from

the spinning April hills His moustaches were white the

tired droop of an old man’s cheeks           She’s gone Jack

grief isnt a uniform and the in the parlor the waxen

odor of lilies in the parlor (He and I we must bury the

uniform of grief)

       then the riversmell the shimmering Potomac reaches

the little choppysilver waves at Indian Head               there

were mockingbiids in the graveyard and the roadsides

stean>ed with spring April enough to shock the world


       when the cable came that He was dead I walked

through the streets full of fiveoclock Madrid seething with

twilight in shivered cubes of aguardiente redwine gaslamp-

green sunsetpink tileochre       eyes lips red cheeks brown

pillar of the throat climbed on the night train at the

Norte station without knowing why
                          Pm so tired of violets

                           Take them all away
         lO

448
       the shattered iridescent bellglass the carefully copied

busts the architectural details the grammar of styles

       It was the end of that book and I left the Oxford

poets in the little noisy room that smelt of stale oliveoil in

the Pension Boston Ahora Now Maintenant Vita
Nuova but we
        who had heard Copey’s beautiful reading voice and

read the handsomely bound books and breathed deep

(breathe deep one two three four) of the waxwork

lilies and the artificial parmavlolet scent under the ether-

cone and sat breakfasting in the library where the bust was

of Octavius

        were now ^ead at the cableoffice


        on the rumblebumping wooden bench on the train

slamming through midnight climbing up from the steer-

age to get a whiff of Atlantic on the lunging steamship

 (the ovalfaced Swiss girl and her husband were my

friends) she had slightly popeyes and a little gruff way of

saying Zut dors and throwing us a little smile a fish to a

 sealion that warmed our darkness when the immigra-

tion officer came for her passport he couldn’t send her to

 Ellis Island la grippe espagnole she was dead



        washing those windows

        K.P.

         cleaning the sparkplugs with a pocketknife

                                                                                II

449
       A. W. O. L.

       grinding the American Beauty roses to dust in that

whore’s bed (the foggy night flamed with proclamations

of the League of the Rights of Man) the almond smell

of high ejcplosives sending singing eclats through the

sweetish puking grandiloquence of the rotting dead


       tomorrow I hoped would be the first day of the first

month of the first year


                                                                  PLAYBOY

        Jack Reed
        was the son of a United States Marshal, a promi-
nent citizen of Portland Oregon.
        He was a likely boy
        so his folks sent him east to school
        and to Harvard.

        Harvard stood for the broad a and those contacts
so useful in later life and good English prose ... if
the hedgehog cant be cultured at Harvard the hedge-
hog cant
        at all and the Lowells only speak to the Cabots
and the Cabots
        and the Oxford Book of Verse.
        Reed was a likely youngster, he wasnt a jew or a
socialist and he didnt come from Roxbury; he was
husky greedy had appetite for everything: a man’s got
to like many things in his life.
        Reed was a man; he liked men he liked women
he liked eating and writing and foggy nights and drink-
ing and foggy nights and swimming and football and

450
rhyme3 verse and being cheerleader ivy orator making
clubs (not the very best clubs, his blood didn’t run thin
enough for the very best clubs)
        and Copey’s voice reading The Man Who Would
Be Kingy the dying fall Urnburialy good English prose
the lamps coming on across the Yard, under the elms
in the twilight
        dim voices in lecturehalls,
        the dying fall the elms the Discobulus the bricks of
the old buildings and the commemorative gates and the
goodies and the deans and the instructors all crying in
thin voices refrain,
                       the rusty machinery creaked, the deans
        refrain 3
quivered under their mortarboards, the cogs turned to
Class Day, and Reed was out in the world:

        Washington Square!
         Conventional turns out to be a cusswordj
        Villon seeking a lodging for the night in the
Italian tenements on Sullivan Street, Bleecker, Car-
mine 5
        research proves R.L.S. to have been a great cocks-
man,
         and as for the Elizabethans


        to hell with them.
         Ship on a cattleboat and see the world have ad-
ventures you can tell funny stories about every evening 3
a man’s got to love . . . the quickening pulse the feel
that today in foggy evenings footsteps taxicabs women’s
eyes .   . . many things in his life.
         Europe with a dash of horseradish, gulp Paris like
an oyster 3
         but there’s more to it than the Oxford Book of
English Verse. Line Steffens talked the cooperative
commonwealth.

                                                                                1%

451
         revolution in a voice as mellow as Copey’s, Diog-
enes Steffens with Marx for a lantern going through
the west looking for a good man, Socrates Steffens kept
asking why not revolution?

        Jack Reed wanted to live in a tub and write verses;
        but he kept meeting bums workingmen husky guys
he liked out of luck out of work why not revolution?
        He couldnt keep his mind on his work with so
many people out of luck;
        in school hadnt he learned the Declaration of In-
dependence by heart? Reed was a westerner and words
meant what they said; when he said something standing
with a classmate at the Harvard Club bar, he meant
what he said from the soles of his feet to the waves of
his untidy hair (his blood didnt run thin enough for
the Harvard Club and the Dutch Treat Club and re-
spectable New York freelance Bohemia).

        Life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness;
        not much of that round the silkmills when
        in 1913,
        he went over to Paterson to write up the strike,
textile workers parading beaten up by the cops, the
strikers in jail; before he knew it he was a striker parad-
ing beaten up by the cops In jail;
        he wouldn’t let the editor bail him out, he’d learn
more with the strikers in jail.
        He learned enough to put on the pageant of the
Paterson Strike in Madison Square garden.
        He learned the hope of a new society where no-
body would be out of luck,
        why not revolution?

        The Metropolitan Magazine sent him to Mexico
        to write up Pancho Villa.
        Pancho Villa taught him to write and the skeleton
        14

452
              3





mountains and the tall organ cactuiy and the armored
trains and the bands playing in little plazas full of dark
girls in blue scarfs
        and the bloody dust and the ping of rifleshots
        in the enormous night of the desert, and the brown
quietvoiced peons dying starving killing for liberty
         for land for water for schools.
         Mexico taught him to write.

         Reed was a westerner and words meant what they

said.

         The war was a blast that blew out all the Diogenes
lanterns
         the good men began to gang up to call for ma-
chineguns. Jack Reed was the last of the great race of
warcorrespondents who ducked under censorships and

risked their skins for a story.
         Jack Reed was the best American writer of hi?

time, if anybody had wanted to know about the wai

 they could have read about it in the articles he wrote
         about the German front,
         the Serbian retreat,
         Saloniki5
         behind the lines in the tottering empire of the

 Czar,
         dodging the secret police,

         jail in Cholm.

         The brasshats wouldnt let him go to France be-

 cause they said one night in the German trenches kid-

 ding with the Boche guncrew he’d pulled the string on a
                                                                                playboy
 Hun gun pointed at the heart of France . . .

 stuff but after all what did it matter who fired the guns

 or which way they were pointed? Reed was with the

 boys who were being blown to hell,

          with the Germans t^if* French the Russians the

                                                                                 15

453
                j



Bulgarians the seven little tailors in the Ghetto in

Salonique,
        and in 1917
        he was with the soldiers and peasants

        in Petrograd in October:
        Smolny,
        Ten Days That Shook the World;

        no more Villa picturesque Mexico, no more Harv-
ard Club playboy stuff, plans for Greek theatres, rhym-
ing verse, good stories of an oldtime warcorrespondent,
        this wasnt fun anymore
        this was grim.

        "Delegate,
        back in the States indictments, the Masses trial,
the "Wobbly trial, Wilson cramming the jails,
        forged passports, speeches, secret documents, rid-
ing the rods across the cordon sanitaire, hiding in the
bunkers on steamboats j
        jail in Finland all his papers stolen,
        no more chance to write verses now, no more warm
chats with every guy you met up with, the college boy
with the nice smile talking himself out of trouble with
the judge
        at the Harvard Club they’re all in the Intelligence
Service making the world safe for the Morgan-Baker-
Stillman combination of banks 5
        that old tramp sipping his coffee out of a tomato-
can’s a spy of the General Staff.

        The world’s no fun anymore,
        only machinegunfire and arson
        starvation lice bedbugs cholera typhus
        no lint for bandages no chloroform or ether thou-
sands dead of gangrened wounds cordon sanitaire and
everywhere spies.
        16

454
        The windows of Smolny glow whitehot like a
bessemer,
        no sleep in Smolny,
        Smolny the giant rollingmill running twentyfour
hours a day rolling out men nations hopes millenniums
impulses fears,
        rawmaterial
        for the foundations
         of a new society.

         A man has to do many things in his life.
         Reed was a westerner words meant what they said.
         He threw everything he had and himself into
Smolny,
         dictatorship of the proletariat;
         U.S.S.R.
         The first workers republic
         was established and stands.
         Reed wrote, undertook missions (there were spies
                        worked till he dropped,
everywhere) ,
         caught typhus and died in Moscow.



                                                      JOE WILLIAMS


     Twentyfive days at sea on the steamer Arple, Glas-

 gow, Captain Thompson, loaded with hides, chipping rust,

 daubing red lead on steel plates that were sizzling hot

 griddles in the sun, painting the stack from dawn to dark,

 pitching and rolling in the heavy dirty swell; bedbugs in

 the bunks in the stinking focastle, slumgullion for grub,

 with potatoes full of eyes and mouldy beans, cockroaches

 mashed on the messtable, but a tot of limejuice every day

 in -accordance with the regulations; then sickening rainy

  heat and Trinidad blue in the mist across the ruddy water.

                                                                                  17

455
    Going tHrbugh the Boca it started to rain and the islands

heaped with ferny parisgreen foliage went grey under the
downpour. By the time they got her warped into the
wharf at Port of Spain, everybody was soaked to the skin

with ram and sweat. Mr. McGregor, striding up and
down in a souwester purple in the face, lost his voice from

the heat and had to hiss out his orders in a mean whisper.
Then the curtain of the rain lifted, the sun came out and
everything steamed. Apart from the heat everybody was

sore because there was talk that they were going up to the
Pitch Lake to load asphaltum.
   Next day nothing happened. The hides in the forward
hold stank when they unbattened the hatches. Clothes and
bedding, hung out to dry in the torrid glare of sun be-
tween showers, was always getting soaked again before
they could get it in. While it was raining there was no-
where you could keep dry; the awning over the deck
dripped continually.
   In the afternoon, Joe’s watch got off, though it wasn’t
much use going ashore because nobody had gotten any
pay. Joe found himself sitting under a palm tree on a
bench in a sort of a park near the waterfront staring at
his feet. It began to ram and he ducked under an awning
in front of a bar. There were electric fans in the bar; a
cool whiff of limes and rum and whiskey in iced drinks
wafted out through the open door. Joe was thirsty for a
beer but he didn’t have a red cent. The rain hung like a
bead curtain at the edge of the awning.
    Standing beside him was a youngish man in a white suit
and a panama hat, who looked like an American. He
glanced at Joe several times, then he caught his eye and
smiled, “Are you an Am-m-merican,” he said. He stut-
tered a little when he talked. “I am that,” said Joe.
    There was a pause. Then the man held out his hand.
 'Welcome to our city,” he said. Joe noticed that he had a
slight edge on. The man’s palm was soft when he shook

456
his hand. Joe didn’t like the way his handshake felt.

live here?” he asked. The man laughed. He had blue eyes
and a round poutlipped face that looked friendly. "'‘Hell

no . . . I’m only here for a couple of days on this West
India cruise. Much b-b-better have saved my money and

stayed home. I wanted to go tp Europe but you c-c-can’t

on account of the war.” “Yare, that’s all they talk about

on the bloody limejuicer I’m on, the war.”
    “Why they brought us to this hole 1 can’t imagine and
now there’s something the matter with the boat and we

can’t leave for two days.”
     “That must be the Monterey?'
     “Yes. It’s a terrible boat, nothing on board but women.
 I’m glad to run into a fellow I can talk to. Seems to be

 nothing but niggers' down here.”
     “Looks like they had ’em all colors in Trinidad.”

     “Say, this rain isn’t going to stop for a hell of a time.
 Come in and have a drink -with me.”

     Joe looked at him suspiciously. '‘All right,” he said

  finally, “but I might as well tell you right now I can’t

  treat you back ... Pm flat and those goddam Scotch-
  men won’t advance us any pay.” “You’re a sailor, aren’t

  you?” asked the man when they got to the bar. “I work

  on a boat, if that’s what you mean.”
      “What’ll you have . . . They make a fine Planter’s

  punch here. Ever tried that?” “I’ll drink a beer ... I

  usually drink beer.” The barkeeper was a broadfaced chink

  with a heartbroken smile like a very old monkey’s. He put

   the drinks down before them very gently as if afraid of

  breaking the glasses. The beer was cold and good in its

   dripping glass. Joe drank it off. “Say, you don’t know

   any baseball scores, do you? Last time I saw a paper

   looked like the Senators had a chance for the pennant.”

       The man took off his panama hat and mopped his

   brow with a handkerchief. He had curly black hair. He

   kept looking at Joe as if he was making up his mind about

                                                                                   19

457
something. Finally' he said, ^^Say my name^s  , . Wa-
wa-wa- . . . Warner Jones.^’ ^^They call me Yank on the
Argyle ... In the navy they called me Slim.”
           you were in the navy, were you? I thought you
looked more like a Jackie than a merchant seaman. Slim.”
    «That so?”
    The man who said his name was Jones ordered two
more of the same. Joe was worried. But what the hell,
they can^t arrest a guy for a deserter on British soil. ^^Say,
did you say you knew anything about the baseball scores?
The leagues must be pretty well underway by now.”
         got the papers up at the hotel . . . like to look at
them?”
        sure would.”
   The rain stopped. The pavement was already diy when
they came out of the bar,

   ^^Say, Pm going to take a ride around this island. Tell
me you can see wild monkeys and all sorts of things.
Why don^t you come along? Pm bored to death of sight-
seeing by myself.”
   Joe thought a minute. ‘^These clothes ain’t fit.  .  . .”

   ^^What the hell, this isn’t Fifth Avenue. Come ahead.”
The man who said his name was Jones signalled a nicely
polished Ford driven by a young chinaman. The china-
man wore glasses and a dark blue suit and looked like a
                          he talked with an English accent. He said
college student j
he’d drive them round the town and out to the Blue Pool.
As they were setting off the man who said his name was
Jones said, ^Wait a minute,” and ran in the bar and got a
flask of Planter’s Punch.
    He talked a blue streak all the time they were driving
out past the British bungalows and brick institution build-
ings and after that out along the road through rubbery
blue woods so dense and steamy it seemed to Joe there
must be a glass roof overhead somewhere. He said how
he liked adventure and travel and wished he was free to
        20

458
ship on boats and bum around and see the world and that
it must be wonderful to depend only on your own sweat
and muscle the way Joe was doing. Joe said, ^‘Yare?”
But the man who said his name was Jones paid no atten-
tion and went right on and said how he had to take care
of his mother and that was a great responsibility and
sometimes he thought he^d go mad and he^d been to a doc-
tor about it and the doctor had advised him to take a
trip, but that the food wasn’t any good on the boat and
gave him indigestion and it was all full of old women
with daughters they wanted to marry off and it made him
nervous having women run after him like that. The worst
of it was not having a friend to talk to about whatever
he had on his mind when he got lonely. He wished he
had a nice good looking fellow who’d been around and
wasn’t a softy and knew what life was and could appre-
ciate beauty for a friend, a fellow like Joe in fact. His
mother was awfully jealous and didn’t like the idea of his
having any intimate friends and would always get sick
or try to hold out on his allowance when she found out
about his having any fnends, because she wanted him to
be always tied to her apron strings but he was sick and
tired of that and from now on he was going to do what
he damn pleased, and she didn’t have to know about
everything he did anyway.
    He kept giving Joe cigarettes and offering them to
the chinaman who said each time, ^Hhank you very much,

sir. I have forgone smoking.” Between them they had
finished the flask of punch and the man who said his name
was Jones was beginning to edge over towards Joe in the

seat, when the chinaman stopped the car at the end of a

little path and said, ^Tf you wish to view the Blue Pool
you must walk up there almost seven minutes, sir. It is the
principal attraction of the island of Trinidad.”
    Joe hopped out of the car and went to make water be-

 side a big tree with shaggy red bark. The man who said

                                                                                21

459
Hs name was Jones came up beside him. “Two minds with

but a single thought,” he said. Joe said, “Yare,” and went
and asked the chinaman where they could see some mon-

keys.
    “The Blue Pool,” said the chinaman, “is one o£ their

favorite resorts.” He got out of the car and walked around

it looking intently with his black beads of eyes into the

foliage over their heads. Suddenly he pointed. Something
black was behind a shaking bunch of foliage. A screechy
giggle came from behind it and three monkeys went off

flying from branch to branch with long swinging leaps. In
a second they were gone and all you could see was the
branches stirring at intervals through the woods where
they jumped. One of them had a pinkish baby monkey
hanging on in front. Joe was tickled. He’d never seen
monkeys really wild like that before. He went off up the
path, walking fast so that the man who said his name
was Jones had trouble keeping up to him. Joe wanted to
see some more monkeys.
   After a few minutes’ walk up hill he began to hear a
waterfall. Something made him think of Great Falls and
Rock Creek and he went all soft inside. There was a pool
under a waterfall hemmed in by giant trees. “Dod gast

it, I’ve got a mind to take me a dip,” he said. “Wouldn’t
there be snakes, Slim^” “Snakes won’t bother you, ’less
you bother ’em first.”
    But when they got right up to the pool they saw that
there were people picnicking there, girls in hght pink and
blue dresses, two or three men in white ducks, grouped
under striped umbrellas. Two Hindoo servants were
waiting on them, bringing dishes out of a hamper. Across
the pool came the chirp-chirp of cultivated English voices.
“Shoot, we can’t go swimmin’ here and they won’t be
any monkeys either.”
    “Suppose we joined them ... I might introduce my-
self and you would be my kid brother. I’ve got a letter

460
to a Colonel Somebody but 'Tfelt too blue to present ltd’
    “What the hell do they want to be fartin’ around here
for?” said Joe and started back down the path again. He
didn’t see any more monkeys and by the time he’d got
back to the car big drops had started to fall.
    “That’ll spoil their goddam picnic,” he said, grinning to
the man who said his name was Jones when he came up,
the sweat running in streams down his face. “My, you’re
a fast walker. Slim.” He puffed and patted him on the
back. Joe got into the car. “I guess we’re goin’ to get it.”
“Sirs,” said the chinaman, “I will return to the city for
I perceive that a downpour is imminent.”
    By the time they’d gone a half a mile it was raining
so hard the chinaman couldn’t see to drive. He ran the
car into a small shed on the side of the road. The rain
pounding on the tin roof overhead sounded loud as a
steamboat letting off steam. The man who said his name
                                           he had to yell to make himself
was Jones started talking j
heard above the rain. “I guess you see some funny sights,
Slim, leading the life you lead.”
    Joe got out of the car and stood facing the sudden
                          the spray in his face felt almost cool. The
curtain of rain 5
man who said his name was Jones sidled up to him hold-
 ing out a cigarette. “How did you like it in the navy^”
    Joe took the cigarette, lit it and said, “Not so good.”
     “I’ve been friends with lots of navy boys ... I sup-
 pose you liked raising cain on shore leave, didn’t you?”
 Joe said he didn’t usually have much pay to raise cain
 with, used to play ball sometimes, that wasn’t so bad
 “But, Slim, I thought sailors didn’t care what they did
 when they got in port.” “I guess some of the boys try to
 paint the town red, but they don’t usually have enough
 jack to get very far.” “Maybe you and I can paint the
 town red in Port of Spain, Slim.” Joe shook his head. “No,
 I gotta go back on board ship.”
     The rain increased till the tin roof roared so Jo^

                                                                                 23

461
couldn’t hear what the man who said his name was Jones’
was trying to say, then slackened and stopped entirely.

^Well, at least you come up to my room in the hotel, Slim,
and we’ll have a couple of drinks. Nobody knows me
here. I can do anything I like.” ^^I’d like to see the sports
page of that paper from home if you don’t mind.”
    They got into the car and rode back to town along roads
brimmed with water like canals. The sun came out hot
and everything was in a blue steam. It was late afternoon.
                                                                      hindoos with
The streets of the town were crowded j
turbans, chinks in natty Hart Schaffner and Marx
clothes, redfaced white men dressed in white, raggedy
shines of all colors.
   Joe felt uncomfortable going through the lobby of the
hotel in his dungarees, pretty wet at that, and he needed
a shave. The man who said his name was Jones put his
arm over his shoulders going up the stairs. His room was
big with tall narrow shuttered windows and smelt of bay
rum. “My, but I’m hot and wet,” he said. “I’m going to
take a shower . . . but first we’d better ring for a couple
of gin fizzes. . . . Don’t you want to take your clothes
off and take it easy? His skin’s about as much clothes as a
fellow can stand in this weather.” Joe shook his head,
“They stink too much,” he said. “Say, have you got them
papers?”
    The hindoo servant came with the drinks while the
man who said his name was Jones was in the bathroom.
Joe took the tray. There was something about the expres-
sion of the hindoo’s thm mouth and black eyes looking
at something behind you m the room that made Joe sore.
He wanted to hit the tobaccocolored bastard. The man
who said his name was Jones came back looking cool in a
silk bathrobe.
    “Sit down, Slim, and we’ll have a drink and a chat.”
The man ran his fingers gently over his forehead as if it
ached and through his curly black hair and settled in an
         H

462
armchair. Joe sat down in a straight chair across the roomc
           I think this heat would be the end of me if I
stayed a week in this place. I don’t see how you stand

it, doing manual work and everything. You must be pretty
tough!”
    Joe wanted to ask about the newspapers but the man
who said his name was Jones was tallang again, saying
how he wished he was tough, seeing the world like that,
meeting all kinds of fellows, going to all kinds of joints,
must see some funny sights, must be funny all these fel-
lows bunking together all these days at sea, rough and
tumble, hey? and then nights ashore, raising cain, paint-
ing the town red, several fellows with one girl. “If I was
living like that, I wouldn’t care what I did, no reputation
to lose, no danger of somebody trying to blackmail jou,
only have to be careful to keep out of jail, hay? Why,
Slim, I’d like to go along with you and lead a life like
that.” “Yare?” said Joe.
    The man who said his name was Jones rang for another
drink. When the hindoo servant had gone Joe asked
again about the papers. “Honestly, Slim, I looked every-
where for them. They must have been thrown out.”
“Well, I guess I’ll be gettin’ aboard my bloody lime-
juicer,” Joe had his hand on the door. The man who said
his name was Jones came running over and took his hand
and said, “No, you’re not going. You said you’d go on a
party with me. You’re an awful nice boy. You won’t be
 sorry. You can’t go away like this, now that you’ve got
 me feeling all sort of chummy and you know amorous,
 Don’t you ever feel that way, Slim? I’ll do the handsome
 thing. I’ll give you fifty dollars.” Joe shook his head
 and pulled his hand away.
                                                                                         he
     He had to give him a shove to get the door open 5
 ran down the white marble steps and out into the street.

     It was about darkj Joe walked along fast. The sweat
 was pouring off him. He was cussing under his breath as

463
he walked along. He felt rotten and sore and he’d wanted

real bad to see some papers from home.
    He loafed up and down a little in the sort of park

place where he’d sat that afternoon, then he started down
towards the wharves. Might as well turn in. The smell of

frying from eating joints reminded him he was hungry.
He turned into one before he remembered he didn’t have
a cent in his pocket. He followed the sound of a mechan-*

ical piano and found himself in the red light district.
Staning in the doorways of the little shacks there weie
nigger wenches of all colors and shapes, halfbreed Chinese
and Indian women, a few faded fat German or French
              one little mulatto girl who reached her hand out
women j
and touched his shoulder as he passed was damn pretty.
He stopped to talk to her, but when he said he was broke,
she laughed and said, ^^Go long from here. Mister No-
Money Man ... no room here for a No-Money Man,”
    When he got back on board he couldn’t find the cook
to try and beg a little grub off him so he took a chaw
and let it go at that. The focastle was like an oven. He
went up on deck with only a pair of overalls on and
walked up and down with the watchman who was a pink-
faced youngster from Dover everybody called Tiny. Tiny
said he’d heard the old man and Mr. McGregor talking
in the cabin about how they’d be off tomorrow to St. Luce
to load limes and then ’ome to blighty and would ’e be
glad to see the tight little hile an’ get off this bleedin’
 crahft, not ’arf. Joe said a hell of a lot of good it’d do
 him, his home was in Washington, D. C. want to get
                              hfe and get a job that pays something.
 out of the c       ^g
 This way every bastardly tourist with a little jack thinks
 he can hire you for his punk.” Joe told Tiny about the
 man who said his name was Jones and he laughed like
 he’d split. ^Tifty dollars, that’s ten quid. I’d a ’ad ’arf a
 mind to let the toff ’ave a go at me for ten quid.”
     The night was absolutely airless. The mosquitoes were
          26

464
beginning to get at Joe’s bare neck and arms. A sweet hot
haze came up from the slack water round the wharves
blurring the lights down the waterfront. They took a
couple of turns without saying anything.
    ^^My eye what did ’e want ye to do, Yank?” said Tiny
giggling. ^^Aw to hell with him,” said Joe. “Pm gom to
get out of this life. Whatever happens, wherever you are,
the seaman gets the s—^y end of the stick. Ain’t that irue,
Tiny?”
    “Not ’arf . .      . ten quid! Why, the Weedin’ to& ought

to be ashaymed of hisself. Corruptin’ morals, that’s what

’e’s after. Ought to go to ’is ’otel with a couple of ship-
mytes and myke him pay blackmyl. There’s many an old

toff in Dover payin’ blackmyl for doin’ less ’n ’e did.
They comes down on a vacaytion and goes after the

bath’ouse boys. . . . Blackmyl ’im, that’s what Pd do,
 Yank.”
    Joe didn’t say anything. After a while he said, “Jeez,

 an’ when I was a kid I thought I wanted to go to the

 tropics.”
     “This ain’t tropics, it’s a Weedin’ ’ell ’ole, that’s what

 it is.”
     They took another couple of turns. Joe went and leaned

 over the side looking down into the greasy blackness God
 damn these mosquitoes. When he spat out his plug of

 tobacco it made a light plunk in the water. He went down

 into the focastle again, crawled into his bunk and pulled

 the blanket over his head and lay there sweating. “Dam

 it, I wanted to see the baseball scores.”




     Next day they coaled ship and the day after they had

 Joe painting the officers’ cabins while the Argyle nosed out

 through the Boca again between the slimegreen ferny

  islands, and he was sore because he had A.B. papers and

                                                                                  27

465
 here they were still treating him like an ordinary sea-
man and he was going to England and didn’t know what

he’d do when he’d get there, and his shipmates said

they’d likely as not run him into a concentraytion camp;

bein’ an alien and landin’ in England without a passport,
wat wit’ war on and ’un spies everywhere, an’ all; but

the breeze had salt in it now and when he peeked out of

the porthole he could see blue ocean instead of the pud-
dlewater off Trinidad and flying fish in hundreds skim-
ming away from the ship’s side.
    The harbor at St. Luce’s was clean and landlocked,
white houses with red roofs under the coconutpalms. It
turned out that it was bananas they were going to load, it

took them a day and a half knocking up partitions in the
afterhold and scantlings for the bananas to hang from. It
was dark by the time they’d come alongside the banana-
wharf and had rigged the two gangplanks and the little
derrick for lowering the bunches into the hold. The wharf
was crowded with colored women laughing and shrieking
and yelling things at the crew, and big buck niggers stand-
ing round doing nothing. The women did the loading.
After a while they started coming up one gangplank, each
one with a huge green bunch of bananas slung on her
head and shoulders; there were old black mammies and
pretty young mulatto girls; their faces shone with sweat
under the big bunchlights, you could see their swinging
breasts hanging down through their ragged clothes, brown
flesh through a rip in a sleeve. When each woman got to
the top of the gangplank two big buck niggers lifted the
bunch tenderly off her shoulders, the foreman gave her
a slip of paper and she ran down the other gangplank to
the wharf again. Except for the donkeyengme men the
deck crew had nothing to do. They stood around uneasy,
watching the women, the glitter of white teeth and eye-
balls, the heavy breasts, the pumping motion of their
thighs. They stood around, loolang at the women, scratch-

        28

466
mg themselves, shifting their weight from one foot to the
           not even much
other j                         smut was passed. It was a black still
night, the smell of the bananas and the stench of nigger-
woman sweat was hot around them^ now and then a little
freshness came in a whiff off some cases of limes piled
on the wharf.
    Joe caught on that Tiny was waving to him to come
somewhere. He followed him mto the shadow. Tiny put
his mouth against his ear, ^Hhere^s bleedin’ tarts ^ere,
Yank, come along.’^ They went up the bow and slid down
a rope to the wharf. The rope scorched their hands. Tiny
spat mto his hands and rubbed them together, Joe did
the same. Then they ducked mto the warehouse. A rat
scuttled past their feet. It was a guano warehouse and
stank of fertilizer. Outside a little door in the back it w^as
pitch black, sandy underfoot. A little glow from street-
lights hit the upper part of the warehouse. There were
women^s voices, a little laugh. Tiny had disappeared. Joe
had his hand on a woman^s bare shoulder. ^^But first you
must give me a shilling,” said a sweet cockney West India
woman’s voice. His voice had gone hoarse, ^^Sure, cutie,
sure I will.”
    When his eyes got used to the dark he could see that
they weren’t the only ones. There were giggles, hoarse
breathing all round them. From the ship came the inter-
mittent whir of the winches, and a mixedup noise of
voices from the women loading bananas.
    The woman was asking for money. ^^Come on now,
white boy, do like you say.” Tiny was standing beside him
buttoning up his pants. “Be back in a jiff, girls.”
    “Sure, we left our jack on board the boat.”
    They ran back through the warehouse with the girls

after them, up the jacobsladder somebody had let down
over the side of the ship and landed on deck out of breath
and doubled up with laughing. When they looked over
the side the women were running up and down the wharl

                                                                                29

467
spitting and cursing at them like wildcats. ‘^Cheeryoh, lay-

dies ” Tiny called down to them, taking off his cap. He
                                                                                     they
grabbed Joe’s arm and pulled him along the deck 5
stood round a while near the end of the gangplank. ^‘^Say,

Tiny, yours was old enough to be your grandmother,
damned if she wasn’t,” whispered Joe. ^^Granny me eye,

It was the pretty un I ’ad.” “The hell you say . . . She
musta been sixty.” “Wot a bleedin’ wopper ... it was
the pretty un I ’ad,” said Tiny, walking off sore.
   A moon had come up red from behind the fringed hills.
The bananabunches the women were carrying up the
gangplank made a twisting green snake under the glare

of the working lights. Joe suddenly got to feeling dis>^
gusted and sleepy. He went down and washed himself
carefully with soap and water before crawling into his
bunk. He went to sleep listening to the Scotch and British
voices of his shipmates, talking about the tarts out back
of the wharfhouse, ’ow many they’d ’ad, ’ow many times,
’ow it stacked up with the Argentyne or Durban or Sing-
apore, The loading kept up all night.
   By noon they’d cleared for Liverpool with the Chief
stoking her up to make a fast passage and all hands talking
about blighty. They had bananas as much as they could eat
that tripj every day the supercargo was bringing up over-
npe bunches and hanging them in the galley. Everybody
was grousing about the ship not being armed, but the
Old Man and Mr. McGregor seemed to take on more
about the bananas than about the raiders. They were al-
 rays peeping down under the canvas cover over the hatch
that had been rigged with a ventilator on the peak of it,
to see if they were ripening too soon. There was a lot of
guying about the blahsted banahnas down in the focastle.
    After crossing the tropic they ran into a nasty norther
that blew four days, after that the weather was dirty right
along. Joe didn’t have much to do after his four hours
                       in the focastle they were all grousing
at the wheel j                                                               about

         30

468
                                                                                           g



the ship not being fumigated to kill the bugs and the cock-
roaches and not being armed and not picking up a convoy.
Then word got around that there were German sub-
marines cruising off the Lizard and everybody from the
Old Man down got short tempered as hell. They all
began picking on Joe on account of America’s not being in
the war and he used to have long arguments with Tin)
and an old fellow from Glasgow they called Haig. Jot;
said he didn’t see what the hell business the States had
In the war and that almost started a fight.
    After they picked up the Scilly Island lights, Sparkf
said they were in touch with a convoy and would have a
destroyer all to themselves up through the Irish Sea that
wouldn’t leave them until they were safe in the Mersey.
The British had won a big battle at Mons. The Old Man
served out a tot of rum all round and everybody was in

fine shape except Joe who was worried about what’d hap-
pen to him getting Into England without a passport. He
was chilly all the time on account of not having any warm
clothes.
    That evening a destroyer loomed suddenly out of the
foggy twilight, looking tall as a church above the great
wave of white water curling from her bows. It gave them
a great scare on the bridge because they thought at first it
was a Hun. The destroyer broke out the Union Jack and
slowed down to the Argyle^s speed, keeping close and
abreast of her. The crew piled out on deck and gave the
destroyer three cheers. Some of them wanted to sing
God Save the Kmg but the officer on the bridge of the de-
stroyer began bawling out the Old Man through a mega-
phone aslang him why in bloody f—g hell he wasn’t

 steering a zigzag course and if he didn’t jolly w^ell knot<

 that it was prohibited making any kind of bloody f—

 noise on a merchantship In wartime.

     It was eight bells and the watches were changing and

 Joe and Tiny began to laugh coming along the deck just

                                                                                 31

469
nt the moment when they met Mr. McGregor stalking by
purple in the face. He stopped square in front of Joe and
^sked him what he found so funny? Joe didn^t answer.
Mr. McGregor stared at him hard and began saying in his

slow mean voice that he was probably not an American

at all but a dirty ^un spy, and told him to report on the
next shift in the stokehole. Joe said he’d signed on as an
A.B. and they didn’t have any right to work him as a
stoker. Mr. McGregor said he’d never struck a man yet

in thirty years at sea but if he let another word out he’d
damn well knock him down. Joe felt burning hot but he
stood still with his fists clenched without saying anything.
For several seconds Mr. McGregor just stared at him^
red as a turkey gobbler. Two of the watch passed along
the decL ^HTrn this fellow over to the bosun and put him
in irons. He may be a spy. ... You go along quiet now
or it’ll be worse for you.”
   Joe spent that night hunched up in a little cubbyhole
that smelt of bilge with his feet in irons. The next morn-
ing the bosun let him out and told him fairly kindly to
go get cookee to give him some porridge but to keep off
the deck. He said they were going to turn him over to the
aliens control as soon as they docked in Liverpool.
   When he crossed the deck to go to the galley, his ankles
still stiff from the irons, he noticed that they were already
in the Mersey. It was a ruddy sunlit morning. In every
direction there were ships at anchor, stumpylooking black
sailboats and patrolboats cutting through the palegreen
ruffled water. Overhead the great pall of brown smoke
was shot here and there with crisp white steam that
caught the sun.
    The cook gave him some porridge and a mug of bitter
barely warm tea. When he came out of the galley they
were further up the river, you could see towns on both
rides, the sky was entirely overcast with brown smoke and
fog. The Ar^le was steaming under one bell.

        3 ^^

470
   Joe went below to the focastle and rolled into his bunk,
His shipmates all stared at him without speaking and
when he spoke to Tiny who was in the bunk below him^
he didn’t answer. That made Joe feel worse than any-,
thing. He turned his face to the wall, pulled the blanket
over his head and went to sleep.
    Somebody shaking him woke him up. ^^Come on my
man,” said a tall English bobby with a blue helmet and
varnished chmstrap who had hold of his shoulder. ^^All

right, jUst a sec,” Joe said. ^T’d like to get washed up.”
The bobby shook his head. “The quieter and quicker you
come the better it’ll be for you.”
    Joe pulled his cap over his eyes, took his cigarbox out
from under his mattress, and followed the bobby out on
deck. The Argyle was already tied up to the wharf. So
without saying goodby to anybody or getting paid off, he
went down the gangplank with the bobby half a step

behind. The bobby had a tight grip on the muscle of his
arm. They walked across a flagstoned wharf and out
through some big iron gates to where the Black Maria
 was waiting. A small crowd of loafers, red faces in the

 fog, black grimy clothes. “Look at the filthy ’un,” one
 man said. A woman hissed, there were a couple of boos
 and a catcall and the shiny black doors closed behind himj
 the car started smoothly and he could feel it speeding
 through the cobbled streets.
     Joe sat hunched up in the dark. He was glad he was
 alone in there. It gave him a chance to get hold of him-

 self. His hands and feet were cold. He had hard work to
 keep from shivering. He wished he was dressed decently.

 All he had on was a shirt and pants spotted with paint
 and a pair of dirty felt slippers. Suddenly the car stopped,
 two bobbies told him to get out and he was hustled down
 a whitewashed corridor into a little room where a police

 inspector, a tall longfaced Englishman, sat at a yellow

 varnished table. The inspector jumped to his feet, walked

                                                                                 33

471
towards Joe with his fists clenched as i£ he was going to

hit him and suddenly said something in what Joe thought
must be German. Joe shook his head, it struck him funny
somehow and he grinned. ^^No savvy/’ he said.
    ^What’s in that box?” the inspector, who had sat down
at the desk again, suddenly bawled out at the bobbies.
^Tou’d oughter search these buggers before you bring
’em in here.”
    One of the bobbies snatched the cigarbox out from
Under Joe’s arm and opened it, looked relieved when he
saw it didn’t have a bomb m it and dumped everything
out on the desk. ^^So you pretend to be an American?” the
man yelled at Joe. ^^Sure I’m an American,” said Joe.
“What the hell do you want to come to England in war-
time for?” “I didn’t want to come to . . “Shut ud.”
the man yelled.
   Then he motioned to the bobbies to go, and said, “Send
in Corporal Eakins.” “Very good, sir,” said the two bob-
bies respectfully in unison. When they’d gone, he came
towards Joe with his fists clenched again. “You might as
well make a clean breast of it, my lad. ... We have all
the necessary information.”
    Joe had to keep his teeth clenched to keep them from
chattering. He was scared.
    “I was on the beach in B.A. you see . . . had to take
the first berth I could get. You don’t think anybody’d ship
on a limejuicer if they could help it, do you?” Joe was
                      he felt warm again.
getting sore 3
   The plainclothes man took up a pencil and tapped with
it threateningly on the desk. “Impudence won’t help you^
                      you’d better keep
my lad . . .                                     a civil tongue in your
head.” Then he began looking over the photographs and
stamps and newspaper clippings that had come out of
Joe’s cigarbox. Two men in khaki came in. “Strip him
and search him,” the man at the desk said without look-
ing up,

        34

472
   Joe looked at the two men without understandings
they had a little the look o£ hospital orderlies. ^^Sharp
now,” one of them said. ^We don’t want to ’ave to use
force,” Joe took off his shirt. It made him sore that he
                       he was ashamed because he didn’t have any
was blushing s
underwear. “All right, breeches next.” Joe stood naked
in his slippers while the men in khaki went through his

shirt and pants. They found a bunch of clean waste in one
pocket, a battered Prince Albert can with a piece of
chewing tobacco in it and a small jackknife with a broken
blade. One of them was examining the belt and pointed
out to the other the place where it had been resewed. He

slit It up with a knife and they both looked eagerly inside,

Joe grinned, “I used to keep my bills in there,” he said
They kept their faces stiff.
    “Open your mouth,” One of them put a heavy hand
on Joe’s jaw. “Sergeant, shall we take out the fillin’s^ ’E’s

got two or three fillin’s in the back of ’is mouth.” The
 man behind the desk shook his head. One of the men
 stepped out of the door and came back with an oiled rub-

 ber glove on his hand. “Lean hover,” said the other man,

 putting his hand on Joe’s neck and shoving his head down
 while the man with the rubber glove felt in his rectum.
 “Hay, for Chris’ sake,” hissed Joe through his teeth.

     “All right, me lad, that’s all for the present,” said the
 man who held his head, letting go. “Sorry, but we ’ave

                        part of the regulations.”
 to do it . . .
     The corporal walked up to the desk and stood at
                                             *
 attention, “All right, sir .           . Nothin’ of interest on the

  prisoner’s person.”
      Joe was terribly cold. He couldn’t keep his teeth from

  chattering.
      “Look in his slippers, can’t you?” growled the inspec-

  tor. Joe didn’t like handing over his slippers because his

  feet were dirty, but there was nothing he could do. Thtf

  corporal slashed them to pieces with his penknife. Then

                                                                                  35

473
both men stood at attention and waited for the inspector

to lift his eye. ^'All right, sir . . . nothin’ to report. Shall

I get the prisoner a blanket, sir? ’E looks chilly.”
   The man behind the desk shook his head and beckoned

to Joe, ^^Come over here. Now are you ready to answer

truthfully and give us no trouble it won’t be worse than a
concentraytion camp for duraytion. . . . But if you give

us trouble I can’t say how serious it mightn’t be. We’re
under the Defence of the Realm Act, don’t forget

that. . . . What’s your name?”
   After Joe had told his name, birthplace, father’s and
mother’s names, names of ships he’d sailed on, the inspec-

tor suddenly shot a question in German at him. Joe shook
his head, ^^Hay, what do you think I know German for?”
   ^^Shut the bugger up, ... We know all about him
anyway.”
   ^‘^Shall we give him ’is kit, sir?” asked one of the men
timidly.
   ^^He won’t need a kit if he isn’t jolly careful.”
   The corporal got a bunch of keys and opened a heavy
wooden door on the side of the room. They pushed Joe
into a little cell with a bench and no window. The door
slammed behind him and Joe was there shivering in the
dark. Well, you’re in the pig’s a. h. for fair, Joe Williams,
he said aloud. He found he could warm himself by doing
exercises and rubbing his arms and legs, but his feet
stayed numb.
   After a while he heard the keydn the lockj the man in
khaki threw a blanket into the cell and slammed the door
to, without giving him a chance to say anything.
   Joe curled up in the blanket on the bench and tried to
go to sleep.
    He woke in a sudden nightmare fright. It was cold. The
watch had been called. He jumped oflE the bench. It was
blind dark. For a second he thought he’d gone blind in
the night. Where he was, and everything since they

        S6

474
sighted the Scilly Island lights came back. He had a lump
of ice in his stomach. He walked up and down from wall
to wall of the cell for a while and then rolled up in the
blanket again. It was a good clean blanket and smelt of
lysol or something like that. He went to sleep.
    He woke up again hungry as hell, wanting to make
water. He shuffled around the square cell for a long time
until he found an enamelled pail under the bench. He
used it and felt better. He was glad it had a cover on it.
He began wondenng how he’d pass the time. He began
thinking about Georgetown and good times he’d had with
Alec and Janey and the gang that hung around Mul-
vaney’s pool parlor and making pickups on moonlight
trips on the Charles Macdister and went over all the
good pitchers he’d ever seen or read about and tried to
remember the batting averages of every man on the
Washington ballteams.
    He’d gotten back to trying to remember his high-
school games, inning by inning, when the key was put
into the lock. The corporal who’d searched him opened
the door and handed him his shirt and pants. “You can
wash up if you want to,” he said. “Better clean up smart.
Orders is to take you to Captain Cooper-Trahsk.” “Gosh,
can’t you get me somethin’ to eat or some water. I’m about
starved. . . . Say, how long have I been in here, any-
way?” Joe was blinking in the bright white light that
came in from the other room. He pulled on his shirt and
pants.
    “Come along,” said the corporal. “Can’t ahnswer no
question till you’ve seen Captain Cooper-Trahsk.” “But
what about my slippers?” “You keep a civil tongue in
your mouth and ahnswer all questions you’re harsked and

 it’ll be all the better for you. . .  Come along.”
    When he followed the corporal down the same corri-
 dor he’d come in by all the English tommies stared at

 his bare feet. In the lavatory there was a shiny brass tap

                                                                                37

475
«)f cold water and a hunk of soap. First Joe took a long

drink. He felt giddy and his knees were shaking. The
cold water and washing his hands and face and feet made
him feel better. The only thing he had to dry himself on
was a roller towel already grimy. ^^Say, I need a shave/’
he said. ^^Youdl ’ave to come along now/’ said the corporal

sternly. “But I got a Gillette somewheres. . .
   The corporal gave him an angry stare. They were going
in the door of a nicely furnished ofEce with a thick red
and brown carpet on the floor. At a mahogany desk sat
an elderly man with white hair and a round roastbeef
face and lots of insignia on his uniform. “Is that . . .

Joe began, but he saw that the corporal after clicking his
heels and saluting had frozen into attention.
   The elderly man raised his head and looked at them
                                                        quite so . . he said.
with a fatherly blue eye, “Ah   .  . .
“Bring him up closer, corporal, and let’s have a look at
him. . . . Isn’t he in rather a mess, corporal? You’d bet-
ter give the poor beggar some shoes and stockings. . . .”
“Very good, sir,” said the corporal in a spiteful tone, stif-
fening to attention again. “At ease, corporal, at ease,” said
the elderly man, putting on a pair of eyeglasses and look-
ing at some papers on his desk. “This Is . . . er .             . .
Zentner . . . claim American citizenship, eh^” “The
name is Williams, sir.” “Ah, quite so ... Joe Williams,
seaman. . . He fixed his blue eyes confidentially on
Joe. “Is that your name, me boy?”
    “Yessir.”
    “Well, how do you come to be trying to get into Eng-
land in wartime without passport or other identifying doc-
ument?”
    Joe told about how he had an American A.B. certifi-
cate and had been on the beach at B.A. . . . Buenos
Aires. “And why were you ... er ... in this condi-
tion in the Argentine?” “Well, sir, I’d been on the Mal-
lory Line and my ship sailed without me and I’d been

        38

476
painting the town red a little, sir, and the skipper pulled
out ahead o£ schedule so that left me on the beach.”
   ^^Ah ... a hot time in the old town tonight . . . that
                                                                            then sud-
sort of thing, eh?” The elderly man laughed j
denly he puckered up his brows. “Let me see . . . er , . .
what steamer of the Mallory Line were you travelling
on?” “The Patagonia^ sir, and I wasn^t travellin’ on her,
I was a seaman on board of her.”
    The elderly man wrote a long while on a sheet of
paper, then he lifted Joe’s cigarbox out of the desk drawer
and began looking through the clippings and photographs.
He brought out a photograph and turned it out so that
Joe could see it. “Quite a pretty girl ... is that your
best beloved, Williams?” Joe blushed scarlet. “That’s my
sister.” “I say she looks like a ripping girl . . . don’t you
think so, corporal?” “Quite so, sir,” said the corporal dis-
tantly. “Now, me boy, if you know anything about the ac-

tivities of German agents in South America . . . many of
them are Americans or impostors masquerading as Ameri-
cans . . . it’ll be much better for you to make a clean
breast of it.”
    “Honestly, sir,” said Joe, “I don’t know a thing about

it. I was only in B.A. for a few days.” “Have you any
parents living?” ^^My father’s a pretty sick man. . . . But
I have my mother and sisters in Georgetown,” “George-
town . . . Georgetown ... let me see . . . Isn’t that
in British Guiana?” “It’s part of Washington, D. C”
“Of course ... ah, I see you were in the navy, . .
The elderly man held off the picture of Joe and the two
other gobs. Joe’s knees felt so weak he thought he was
going to fall down. “No, sir, that was in the naval re-
serve.”
    The elderly man put everything back in the cigarbox.
“Youcanhavethesenow, my boy. . . . You’d better give
him a bit of breakfast and let him have an airing in the
 yara. He looks a bit weak on his pins, corporal.”

                                                                                 39

477
   "Very good, sir,” The corporal saluted, and they
inarched out.
   The breakfast was watery oatmeal, stale tea and two

slices of bread with marganne on it. After it Joe felt hun-

grier than before. Still it was good to get out in the air,

even if it was drizzling and the flagstones of the small
courtyard where they put him were like ice to his bare

feet under the thin slime of black mud that was over
them.
   There was another prisoner in the courtyard, a little

fatfaced man in a derby hat and a brown overcoat, who
came up to Joe immediately. “Say, are you an American?”
   “Sure,” said Joe.
   “My name’s Zentner . . . buyer in restaurant furnish-
ings . . . from Chicago. . . . This is the tamnest out-
rage. Here I come to this tamned country to buy their
tamned goods, to spend good American dollars. .          . .
Three days ago yet I placed a ten tousand dollar order
in Sheffield. And they arrest me for a spy and I been
here all night yet and only this morning vill they let
me telephone the consulate. It is outrageous and I hafe a
passport and visa all they vant. I can sue for this outrage.
I shall take it to Vashington. I shall sue the British gov-
ernment for a hundred tousand dollars for defamation of
character. Forty years an American citizen and my fader
he came not from Chermany but from Poland. . . . And
you, poor boy, I see that you hat no shoes. And they talk
about the atrocious Chermans and if this ain’t an atrocity,
vat is it?”
    Joe was shivering and running round the court at a jog-
trot to try to keep warm. Mr. Zentner took off his brown
coat and handed it to him.
    “Here, kid, you put that coat on.” “But, jeez, it’s too
goodj that’s damn nice of you.” “In adversity vc must
help von anoder.”
    “Dod gast it, if this is thdr spring, I hate to think what
        40

478
their winter’s like, . . . I’ll give the coat back to you
when I go in. Jeez, my feet are cold. . . . Say, d’d they
search you?” Mr. Zentner rolled up his eyes. ^^Outra-
geous,” he spluttered . . . ‘‘'*Vat indignities to a buyer
from a neutral and friendly country. Vait till I tell the
ambassador. I shall sue. I shall demand damages.” ^^Same
here,” said Joe, laughing.
    The corporal appeared in the door and shouted, ^^Wil-
liams.” Joe gave back the coat and shook Mr. Zentner’s
fat hand. ^^Say, for Gawd’s sake, don’t forget to tell the
consul there’s another American here. They’re talkin’
about sendin’ me to a concentration camp for duration.”
^^Sure, don’t vorry, boy. I’ll get you out,” said Mr. Zent-
ner, puffing out his chest.
    This time Joe was taken to a regular cell that had a
little light and room to walk around. The corporal gave
him a pair of shoes and some wool socks full of holes. He
couldn’t get the shoes on but the socks warmed his feet
up a little. At noon they handed hirK ^ kind of stew that
was mostly potatoes with eyes in them and some more
bread and margarine.
    The third day when the turnkey brought the noonday
slum, he brought a brownpaper package that had been
opened. In it was a suit of clothes, shirt, flannel under-
wear, socks and even a necktie.
    “There was a chit with it, but it’s against the regulay-
tions,” said the turnkey. “That outfit’ll make a bloomin’
toff out of you.”
    Late that afternoon the turnkey told Joe to come along
 and he put on the clean collar that was too tight for his
 neck and the necktie and hitched up the pants that were
 much too big for him around the waist and followed along
 corridors and across a court full of tommies into a little

 office with a sentry at the door and a sergeant at a desk.
 Sitting on a chair was a busylooking young man with a
 straw hat on his knees. “ ’Ere’s your man. sir,” said the

                                                                                 41

479
sergeant >;rItnout looking at Joe.            let you question


   The busylooking young man got to his feet and went
up to Joe. ^Well, youVe certainly been making me a lot

of trouble, but IVe been over the records in your case and

it looks to me as if you 'were what you represented your-

self to be. . . . Whafs your father’s name?”
   ^^Same as mine, Joseph P. Williams. . . . Say, are you
the American consul?”
   ^T’m from the consulate. . . . Say, what the hell do
you want to come ashore without a passport for? Don’t
you think we have anything better to do than to take care
of a lot of damn fools that don’t know enough to come in
when it rains? Damn it, I was goin’ to play golf this
afternoon and here Pve been here two hours waiting to
get you out of the cooler.”

    ^^Jeez, I didn’t come ashore. They come on and got
me.”
    “That’ll teach you a lesson, I hope. . . . Next time
you have your papers in order.”
    “Yessirree ... I shu will.”
   A half an hour later Joe was out on the street, the cigar-
box and his old clothes rolled up in a ball under his arm.
                                             the redfaced people in dark
It w^as a sunny afternoon 5
clothes, longfaced women in crummy hats, the streets full
of big buses and the tall trolleycars^ everything looked
awful funny, until he suddenly remembered it was Eng-
land and he’d never been there before.
    He had to wait a long time in an empty olEce at the
consulate while the busylooking young man made up a
Jot of papers. He was hungry and kept thinking of beef-
steak and frenchfried. At last he was called to the desk and
given a paper and told that there was a berth all ready
for him on the American steamer Tamf^y out of Pensa-
cola, and he’d better go right down to the agents and make
sure about it and go on boarH and if they caught him
        42

480
around Liverpool again it would be the worse for him.
    “Say, IS there any way I can get anything to eat around
here, Mr. Consul'”’ “What do you think this is, a restau-
rant?   . . No, we have no appropriations for any hand-
outs. You ought to be grateful for what we’ve done al-
ready.” “They never paid me off on the Argyle and I’m
about starved in that jail, that’s all.” “Well, here’s a shil-

ling but that’s absolutely aU I can do.” Joe looked at the

coin, “Who’s ’at—^King George? Well, thank you, Mr.
Consul.”
    He was walking along the street with the agent’s ad-
 dress in one hand and the shilling in the other. He felt

 sore and faint and sick at his stomach. He saw Mr. Zent-
 ner the other side of the street. He ran across through the
 jammed up traffic and went up to him with his hand held

 out.
     “I got the clothes, Mr. Zentner, it was damn nice of
 you to send them.” Mr. Zentner was walking along with

 a small man in an officer’s uniform. He waved a pudgy
 hand and said, “Glad to be of service to a fellow atizen,”
 and walked on.
      Joe went into a fried fish shop and spent sixpence on

  fried fish and spent the other sixpence on a big mug of

  beer in a saloon where he’d hoped to find free lunch to

  fill up on but there wasn’t any free lunch. By the time

  he’d foimd his way to the agent’s office it was closed and

  there he was roaming round the streets in the white misty

  evening without any place to go. He asked several guys

  around the wharves if they knew where the Tamfa was

   docked, but nobody did and they talked so funny he could

   hardly understand what they said anyway.
       Then just when the streetlights were going on, and Joe
   was feeling pretty discouraged, he found himself walking
   down a side street behind three Americans. He caught

   up to them and asked them if they knew where the Tamfa

   was. Why the hell shouldn’t they know, weren’t they

                                                                                   43

481
off^n her and out to see the goddam town and he^d better
come along. And if he wasn’t tickled to meet some guys
from home after those two months on the limejuicer and
being in jail and everything. They went into a bar and
drank some whiskey and he told all about the jail and
how the damn bobbies had taken him ofE the Argyle and
he’d never gotten his pay nor nutten and they set him up

to drinks and one of the guys who was from Norfolk,

Virginia, named Will Stirp pulled out a five dollar bill
and said to take that and pay him back when he could.

    It was like coming home to God’s country running into
guys like that and they all had a drink all aroimd, they
were four of ’em Americans in this lousy limejuicer town
and they each set up a round because they were four of
’em Americans ready to fight the world. Olaf was a Swede
but he had his first papers so he counted too and the other

feller’s name was Maloney. The hatchetfaced barmaid
                                                                                    she’d
held back on the change but they got it out of her 3
only given ’em fifteen shillings instead of twenty for a
pound, but they made her give the five shillings back.
They went to another fried fish shop, couldn’t seem to
get a damn thing to eat in this country except fried fish
and then they all had some more drinks and were the
four of them Americans feeling pretty good in this lousy
limejuicer town. A runner got hold of them because it was
closing time on account of the war and there wasn’t a damn
thing open and very few streetlights and funny little hats
on the streetlights on account of the zeppelins. The runner
was a pale ratfaced punk and said he knowed a house
where they could ’ave a bit of beer and nice girls and a
quiet social time. There was a big lamp with red roses
painted on it in the parlor of the house and the girls were
skinny and had horseteeth and there were some bloody
limejukers there who were pretty well under way and
they were the four of them Americans. The limeys began
to pick on Olaf for bein’ a bloody ’un. Olaf said he was a

        44 ^

482
Swede but that he’d sooner be a bloody ’un than a
juicer at that. Somebody poked somebody else and the
first thing Joe knew he was fighting a guy bigger ’n he
was and pohce whistles blew and there was the whole
crowd of them piled up in the Black Maria.
   Will Stirp kept saying they was the four of them
Americans just havin’ a pleasant social time and there was
no call for the bobbies to interfere. But they were all
dragged up to a desk and committed and all four of ’em
Americans locked up in the same cell and the limeys in
another cell. The police station was full of drunks yelling
and singing. Maloney had a bloody nose. Olaf went to
sleep. Joe couldn’t sleep, he kept saying to Will Stirp he
was scared they sure would send him to a concentration
camp for the duration of the war this time and each time
Will Stirp said they were the four of them Americans
ind wasn’t he a Freeborn American Citizen and there
wasn’t a damn thing they could do to ’em. Freedom of the
seas, God damn it.
    Next morning they were in court and It was funny as

                                                    it was solemn as Quaker-
hell except that Joe was scared j
meetin’ and the magistrate wore a little wig and they
were everyone of ’em fined three and six and costs. It
came to about a dollar a head. Darned lucky they still
had some jack on them.
    And the magistrate in the little wig gave ’em a hell of
a talking to about how this was wartime and they had no
right being drunk and disorderly on British soil but had
ought to be fighting shoulder to shoulder with their broth-

ers, Englishmen of their own blood and to whom the
Americans owed everything, even their existence as a
great nation, to defend civilization and free institutions
and plucky little Belgium against the Invading huns who
were raping women and sinking peaceful merchantmen.
    When the magistrate had finished, the court attendants

said, ^^Hear, hear,” xmder their breath and they all looked

                                                                                45

483
very savage and solemn and turned the American boys
loose after they’d paid their fines and the police sergeant
had looked at their papers. They held Joe after the others
on account of his paper being from the consulate and not
having the stamp of the proper police station on it but
after a while they let him go with a warning not to come
ashore again and that if he did it would be worse for
him.
    Joe felt relieved when he’d seen the skipper and had
been taken on and had rigged up his bunk and gone
ashore and gotten his bundle that he’d left with the nice
flaxenhaired barmaid at the first pub he’d gone to the
night before. At last he was on an American ship. She had
an American flag painted on either side of the hull and
her name Tarnfa, Pensacola, Florida, in white letters.
There was a colored boy cooking and first thing they had
cornmeal mush and karo syrup, and coffee instead of that
lousy tea and the food tasted awful good. Joe felt better
than any time since he’d left home. The bunks were clean
and a fine feeling it was when the Tamfa left the dock
with her whistle blowing and started easing down the
slatecolored stream of the Mersey towards the sea.




    Fifteen days to Hampton Roads, with sunny weather
and a sea like glass every day up to the last two days and
then a stiff northwesterly wind that kicked up considerable
chop off the Capes. They landed the few bundles of cot-
ton print goods that made up the cargo at the Union
Terminal in Norfolk. It was a big day for Joe when he
went ashore with his pay in his pocket to take a look
around the town with Will Stirp, who belonged there.
    They went to see Will Stirp’s folks and took in a ball
game and after that hopped the trolley down to Virginia
Beach with some girls Will Stirp knew. One of the girls’
         46

484
                              and she was very
names was Della 5                            dark and Joe fell for
her^ kind of. When they were putting on their bathing
suits In the bathhouse he asked Will would she . , , ?
And Will got sore and said, ^^Ain^t you got the sense to
tell a good girl from a hooker?” And Joe said well, you
never could tell nowadays.
    They went in swimming and fooled around the beach
In their bathing suits and built a fire and toasted marsh-
mallows and then they took the girls home. Della let Joe
kiss her when they said good night and he began kinder
planning that sheM be his steady girl.
    Back in town they didn^t know just what to do. They
wanted some drinks and a couple of frails but they were
afraid of getting tanked up and spending all their mone>
They went to a poolroom Will knew and shot some poo^
and Joe was pretty good and cleaned up the local boys.
After that they went and Joe set up a drink but it wa^
closing time and right away they were out on the stree^
                                                                      Will said ho
again. They couldn’t find any hookers 5
knew a house bur they soaked yju too damn much, and
they were just about going home to turn in when the]'
ran into two high yellers who gave ’em the eye. The}
followed ’em down the street a long way and Into a crosf
street where there weren’t many lights. The girls wer^
hot stuff but they were scared and nervous for fear some
body might see ’em. They found an empty house with 2
back porch where it was black as pitch and took ’em uf
there and afterwards they went back and slept at Wili
Stirp’s folks’ house.
    The Tam'pa had gone into drydock at Newport News
 for repairs on a started plate. Joe and Will Stirp were
 paid off and hung round Norfolk all day without know-
 ing what to do with themselves. Saturday afternoons and
 Sundays, Joe played a little baseball with a scratch tearr
 of boys who worked in the Navy Yard, evenings he went
 out with Della Matthews. She was a stenographer in the

                                                                                47

485
First National Bank and used tc say she^d never marry

a boy who went to sea, you couldn’t trust ’em and that it
was a rough kind of a life and didn’t have any advance-
ment in it. Joe said she was right but you were only
young once and what the hell things didn’t matter so
much anyway. She used to ask him about his folks and why
he didn’t go up to Washington to see them especially as

his dad was ill. He said the old man could choke for all
he cared, he hated him, that was about the size of it. She
said she thought he was terrible. That time he was setting
her up to a soda after the movies. She looked cute and
plump in a fluffy pink dress and her little black eyes all
excited and flashing. Joe said not to talk about that stuff,

it didn’t matter, but she looked at him awful mean and
mad and said she’d like to shake him and that everything
mattered terribly and it was wicked to talk like that and
that he was a nice boy and came from nice people and
had been nicely raised and ought to be thinking of get-
ting ahead in the world instead of being a bum and a
loafer. Joe got sore and said was that so^ and left her
at her folks’ house without saying another word. He
didn’t see her for four or five days after that.
   Then he went by where Della worked, and waited for
her to come out one evening. He’d been thinking about
her more than he wanted to and what she’d said. First,
she tried to walk past him but he grinned at her and she
couldn’t help smiling back. He was pretty broke by that
time but he took her and bought her a box of candy. They
talked about how hot it was and he said they’d go to the
ball game next week. He told her how the Tamfa was
pulling out for Pensacola to load lumber and then across
to the other side.
    They were waiting for the trolley to go to Virginia
Beach, walking up and down fighting the mosquitoes. She
looked all upset when he said he was going to the other
side. Before Joe knew what he was doing he was saying
        48

486
that he wouldn^t ship on the Tamfa again, but that he’d
get a job right here in Norfolk.
    That night was full moon. They fooled around in their
bathing suits a long while on the beach beside a little
smudgefire Joe made to keep the mosquitoes off. He v/as
sitting crosslegged and she lay with her head on his knees
and all the time he was stroking her hair and leaning
                                   she said how funny his face looked
over and kissing her 5
upside down when he kissed her like that. She said they’d
get married as soon as he got a steady job and between the
two of them they’d amount to something. Ever since
she’d graduated from high school at the head of her class
she’d felt she ought to work hard and amount to some-
thing. ^^The folks round here are awful no-account, Joe,
don’t know they’re alive half the time.”
    ^^D’you know it, Del, you kinda remind me o’ my sis-
ter Janey, honest you do. Dod gast it, she’s amounting to
something all right.     .  . . She’s awful pretty too. . .
    Della said she hoped she could see her some day and
Joe said sure she would and he pulled her to her feet and
drew her to him tight and hugged her and kissed her. It
was late, and the beach was chilly and lonely under the big
moon. Della got atremblmg and said she’d have to get her
clothes on or she’d catch her death. They had to run not
to lose the last car.
    The rails twanged as the car lurched through the moonlit
pmebarrens full of tambourining dryflies and katydids.
Della suddenly crumpled up and began to cry. Joe kept
asking her what the matter was but she wouldn’t answer,
 only cried and cried. It was kind of a relief to leave her at
 her folks’ house and walk alone through the empty airless

 streets to the boarding house where he had a room.
     All the next week he hoofed it around Norfolk and
 Portsmouth looking for a job that had a future to it. He
 even went over to Newport News. Coming back on the

 ferry, he didn’t have eno\^h jack to pay his fare and had

                                                                                49

487
to get the guy who took tickets to let him work his way
over sweeping up. The landlady began to ask for next
week’s rent. All the jobs Joe applied for needed experience
or training or you’d ought to have finished high school and
there weren’t many jobs anyway, so in the end he had to
go boating again, on a seagoing barge that was waiting for
a towboat to take her down east to Rockport with a load of
coal.

                                                            it v/asn’t such a bad
   There were five barges in the tow 3
trip, just him and an old man named Gaskin and his boy,
a kid of about fifteen whose name was Joe too. The only
trouble they had was in a squall off Cape Cod when the tow
rope parted, but the towboat captain was right up on his
toes and managed to get a new cable on board ’em before
they’d straightened out on their anchor.
    Up in Rockport they unloaded their coal and anchored
out in the harbor waiting to be towed to another wharf to
load granite blocks for the trip back. One night when
Gaskin and his boy had gone ashore and Joe was on watch
the second engineer of the tug, a thinfaced guy named
Hart came under the stern in a skiff and whispered to Joe
did he want some c—^t. Joe was stretched out on the
house smoking a pipe and thinking about Della. The hills
and the harbor and the rocky shore were fading into a
warm pink twilight. Hart had a nervous stuttering man-
ner. Joe held off at first but after a while he said, ^^Bring
’em along.” “Got any cards?” said Hart. “Yare I got a
pack.”
    Joe went below to clean up the cabin. He’d just kid ’em
along, he was thinking. He’d oughtn’t to have a rough time
with girls and all that now that he was going to marry
Della. He heard the sound of the oars and went out on
deck. A fogbank was coming in from the sea. There was
Hart and his two girls under the stern. They tripped and
giggled and fell hard against him when he helped ’em over
the side. They’d brought some liquor and a couple of
         50

488
pounds of hamburger and some crackers. They weren’t
much for looks but they were pretty good sorts with big
firm arms and shoulders and they sure could drink liquor.
Joe’d never seen girls like that before. They were sports
all right. They had four quarts of liquor between ’em and
drank it in tumblers.
    The other two barges were sounding their claxons every
two minutes, but Joe forgot all about his. The fog was
white like canvas nailed across the cabin ports. They played
strip poker but they didn’t get very far with it. Him and
Hart changed girls three times that night. The girls were
cookoo, they never seemed to have enough, but round
twelve the girls were darned decent, they cooked up the
hamburger and served up a lunch and ate all old man
Gaskin’s bread and butter.
    Then Hart passed out and the girls began to get worried
about getting home on account of the fog and everything.
All of ’em laughing like loons they hauled Hart up on
deck and poured a bucket of water on him. That Maine
water was so cold that he came to like sixty sore as a
pup and wanting to fight Joe. The girls quieted him down
and got him into the boat and they went off into the fog
singing Tifferary,
    Joe was reeling himself. He stuck his head in a bucket
 of water and cleaned up the cabin and threw the bottles
 overboard and started working on the claxon regularly.
 To hell with ’em, he kept saying to himself, he wouldn’t
 be a plaster saint for anybody. He was feeling fine, he
 wished he had something more to do than spin that damn
 claxon.
     Old man Gaskm came on board about day. j oe could see
 he’d gotten wind of something because after that he never
 would speak to him except to give orders and wouldn’t let

                                       so that when they’d unloaded the
  his boy speak to him 5
  granite blocks in East New York, Joe asked for his pay
  and said he was through. Old man Gaskin growled out it

                                                                                  5 ^

489
was a good riddance and that he wouldn’t have no boozin’
and whorin’ on his barge. So there was Joe with fortyfive

dollars in his pocket walking through Red Hook looking

for a boarding house.
    After he’d been a couple of days reading want ads and
going around Brooklyn looking for a job he got sick. He
went to a sawbones an oldtimer at the boarding house told
him about. The doc who was a little kike with a goatee told
him it was the gonawria and he’d have to come every
afternoon for treatment. He said he’d guarantee to cure
him up for fifty dollars, half payable in advance, and that
he’d advise him to have a bloodtest taken to see if he had
syphilis too and that would cost him fifteen dollars. Joe
paid down the twentyfive but said he’d think about the test.
He had a treatment and went out onto the street. The doc
had told him to be sure to walk as little as possible, but
he couldn’t seem to go home to the stinking boardinghouse
and wandered aimlessly round the clattering Brooklyn
streets. It was a hot afternoon. The sweat was pouring off
him as he walked. If you catch it right the first day or two
it ain’t so bad, he kept saying to himself. He came out on a
                                           must be Brooklyn Bridge.
bridge under the elevated j
    It was cooler walking across the bridge. Through the
spiderwebbing of cables, the shipping and the pack of tall
buildings were black against the sparkle of the harbor. Joe
sat down on a bench at the first pier and stretched his legs
out in front of him. Here he’d gone to work and caught a
dose. He felt terrible and how was he going to write Del
nowj and his board to pay, and a job to get and these damn
treatments to take. Jesus, he felt lousy.
    A kid came by with an evening paper. He bought a
Journal and sat with the paper on his lap looking at the
headlines: rush more troops to mex border. What the
hell could he do? He couldn’t even join the national guard
and go to Mexico^ they wouldn’t take you if you were sick
and even if they did it would be the goddam navy all over
        52

490
again. He sat reading the want ads, the ads about adding
to your income with two hours^ agreeable work at home
evenings, the ads of Pelmanism and correspondence
courses. What the Kell could he do? He sat there until it
was dark. Then he took a car to Atlantic Avenue and went
up four flights to the room where he had a cot under the
window and turned in.
    That night a big thundersquall came up. There was a
lot of thunder and lightning damned close. Joe lay flat on
his back watching the lightning so bright it dimmed the
streetlights flicker on the ceiling. The springs rattled
every time the guy in the other cot turned in his sleep. It
began to ram in, but Joe felt so weak and sick it was a
long time before he had the gumption to sit up and pull
down the window.
    In the morning the landlady, who was a big raw-boned
Swedish woman with wisps of flaxen hair down over her
bony face, started bawling him out about the bed^s being
wet.      can’t help it if it rains, can P” he grumbled, look-
ing at her big feet. When he caught her eye, it came over
him that she was kidding him and they both laughed.
    She was a swell woman, her name was Mrs. Olsen and
she’d raised six children, three boys who’d grown up and
gone to sea, a girl who was a school teacher in St, Paul and
a pair of girl twins about seven or eight who were always
getting into mischief. ^^Yust one year more and I send
them to Olga in Milwaukee. I know sailormen.” Pop Olsen
had been on the beach somewhere in the South Seas for
years. ^Wust as well he stay there. In Brooklyn he been
always in de lockup. Every week cost me money to get
him outa yail.”
    Joe got to helping her round the house with the clean-
ing and did odd painting and carpentering jobs for her.
After his money ran out she let him stay on and even lent
him twentyfive bucks to pay the doctor when he told her
about being sick. She slapped him on the back when he

                                                                                 53

491
thanked herj “Every boy I even lend money to, ne turn

out yust one big bum,’’ she said and laughed. She was a

swell woman.
    It was nasty sleety winter weather. Mornings Joe sat

in the steamy kitchen studying a course in navigation he’d

started getting from the Alexander Hamilton Institute.
Afternoons he fidgeted in the dingy doctor’s office that
smelt of carbolic, waiting for his turn for treatment, loobng
through frayed copies of the National Geografhic for

1909. It was a glum looking bunch waited in there. Nobody
ever said anything much to anybody else. A couple of times
he met guys on the street he’d talked with a little waiting
in there, but they always walked right past him as if they
didn’t see him. Evenings he sometimes went over to Man-
hattan and played checkers at the Seamen’s Institute or
hung around the Seamen’s Union getting the dope on ships
he might get a berth on when the doc dried him up. It was
a bum time except that Mrs. Olsen was darn good to him
and he got fonder of her than he’d ever been of his own
mother.
    The darn kike sawbones tried to hold him up for an-
other twentyfive bucks to complete the cure but Joe said
to hell with it and shipped as an A.B. on a brandnew
Standard Oil tanker, the Montana, bound light for Tam-
pico and then out east, some of the boys said, to Aden and
others said to Bombay. He was sick of the cold and the
sleet and the grimy Brooklyn streets and the logarithm
tables in the course on navigation he couldn’t get through
his head and Mrs. Olsen’s bullying jollying voice; she was
beginning to act like she wanted to run his life for him.
She was a swell woman but it was about time he got the
hell out.
    The Montana rounded Sandy Hook in a spiteful lash-
ing snowstorm out of the nortWest, but three days later
they were in the Gulf Stream south of Hatteras rolling
in a long swell with all the crew’s denims and shirts drying

         54

492
oa lines rigged from the shrouds. It was good to be on
blue water again.
                                                          they said that mescal
    Tampico was a hell of a place 5
made you crazy if you drank too much of it, there were
big dance halls full of greasers dancing with their hats on
and with guns on their hips, and bands and mechanical
pianos going full tilt in every bar, and fights and drunk
Texans from the oilwells. The doors of all the cribhouse^
were open so that you could see the bed with white plllowr
and the picture of the Virgin over it and the lamps with
fancy shades and the colored paper trimming, the broad-
faced brown girls sat out in front in lace slips. But every-
thing was so damned high that they spent up all their jack
first thing and had to go back on board before it was
hardly midnight. And the mosquitoes got into the focastle
and the sandflies about day and it was hot and nobody
could sleep.
    When the tanks had been pumped full the Montana
went out into the Gulf of Mexico into a norther v/ith the
decks awash and the spray lashing the bridge. They hadnk
been out two hour^ before theyM lost a man overboard
off the monkeywalk and a boy named Higgins had had his
foot smashed lashing the starboard anchor that had broken
loose. It made ’em pretty sore down in the focastle that
the skipper wouldn’t lower a boat, though the older men
said that no boat could have lived in a sea like that. As it
was the skipper cruised in a wide curve and took a couple
of seas on his beam that like to stove in the steel dedks.
    Nothing much else happened on that trip except that
one night when Joe was at the wheel and the ship was
dead quiet except for the irregular rustle of broken water
as she ploughed through the long flat seas eastward, he
suddenly smelt roses or honeysuclde maybe. The sky was
blue as a bowl of curdled milk with a waned scrap of moon
bobbing up from time to time. Tt was honeysuckle, sure
enough, and manured garden patches and moist foliage like

                                                                                 55

493
walking past the open door of a florist’s in winter. It made
him feel soft and funny inside like he had a girl standing

right beside him on the bridge, like he had Del there with
her hair all smelly with some kind of perfume. Funny,
the smell of dark, girls’ hair. He took down the binoculars
but he couldn’t see anything on the horizon only the
curdled scud drifting west in the faint moonlight. He
found he was losing his course, good thing the mate hadn’t
picked out that moment to look aft at the wake. He got
her back to E.N.E. by J4E. When his trick was over and
he rolled into his bunk he lay awake a long time thinking
of Del. God, he wanted money and a good job and a girl
of his own instead of all these damn floosies when you got
into port. What he ought to do was go down to Norfolk
and settle down and get married.
    Next day about noon they sighted the grey sugarloaf of
Pico with a band of white clouds just under the peak and
Fayal blue and irregular to the north. They passed be-

                                                                             it smelled
tween the tvco islands. The sea got very blue 3
like the country lanes outside of Washington when there
was honeysuckle and laurel blooming in the runs. The
bluegreen yellowgreen patchwork fields covered the steep
hills like 'an oldfashioned quilt. That night they raised
other islands to the eastward.
    Five days of a heavy groundswell and they were in
the Straits of Gibraltar. Eight days of dirty sea and chilly
driving rain and they were off the Egyptian coast, a warm
sunny morning, going into the port of Alexandria under
one bell while the band of yellow mist ahead thickened
up into masts, wharves, buildings, palmtrees. The streets
smelt like a garbage pail, they drank arrack in bars run
hy Greeks who’d been in America and paid a dollar apiece
to see three Jewishlooking girls dance a belly dance naked
in a b^ek room. In Alexandria they saw their first cam-
ouflaged ships*, three British scoutcruisers striped like zebras
and a transport all |minted up with blue and green water-

         56

494
markings. When they saw them, all the watch on deck
lined up along the rail and laughed like theyM split.
    When he got paid off in New York a month later it
made him feel pretty good to go to Mrs. Olsen and pay her
back what he owed her. She had another youngster stay-
ing with her at the boarding house, a towheaded Swede
who didn’t know any English, so she didn’t pay much at-
tention to Joe. He hung around the kitchen a little while
and asked her how things were and told her about the
bunch on the Montana^ then he went over to the Penn
Station to see when he could catch a train to Washington.
He sat dosing in the smoker of the daycoach half the night
thinking of Georgetown and when he’d been a kid at school
and the bunch in the poolroom on          Street and trips on
the river with Alec and Janey.
    It was a bright wintry sunny morning when he piled out
at the Union Station. He couldn’t seem to make up his
mind to go over to Georgetown to see the folks. He loafed
around the Union Station, got a shave and a shine and a
cup of coffee, read the Washington "Posty counted his
moneys he still had more’n fifty iron men, quite a roll of
lettuce for a guy like him. Then he guessed he’d wait and
see Janey first, he’d wait around and maybe he’d catch her
coming out from where she worked at noon. He walked
around the Capitol Grounds and down Pennsylvania Ave-
nue to the White House. On the Avenue he saw the same
enlistment booth where he’d enlisted for the navy. Kinder
gave him the creeps. He went and sat in the winter sun-
light in Lafayette Square, looking at the little dressed up
kids playing and the nursemaids and the fat starlings hop-
ping round the grass and the statue of Andrew Jackson,
until he thought it was time to go catch Janey. His heart
was beating so he could hardly see straight. It must have
been later than he thought because none of the girls com-
ing out of the elevator was her, though he waited about an
hour in the vestibule of the Riggs Building until some

                                                                                 57

495
tousy dick or other came up to him and asked him what
the hell he was loitering around for.
   So Joe had to go over to Georgetown after all to find
out where Janey was. Mommer was in and his kid sisters
and they were all talking about how they were going to
have the house remodeled with the ten thousand dollars
from the Old Man^s insurance and they wanted him to go
up to Oak Hill to see the grave, but Joe said what was the
use and got away as soon as he could. They asked all kinds
of questions about how he was getting on and he didn^t
know what the hell to tell ’em. They told him where Janey
lived but they didn’t know when she got out of her office.
   He stopped at the Belasco and bought some theatre
tickets and then went back to the Riggs Building. He got
there just as Janey was stepping out of the elevator. She
was nicely dressed and had her chin up with a new little
cute independent tilt. He was so glad to see her he was
afraid he was going to bawl. Her voice was different. She
had a quick chilly way of talking and a kidding manner
she’d never had before. He took her to supper and to the
theatre and she told him all about how well she was getting
on at Dreyfus and Carroll and what interesting people she
was getting to know. It made him feel like a bum going
around with her.
    Then he left her at the apartment she had with a girl
friend and took the car back to the station. He settled
down and smoked a cigar in the smoker of the day-
coach. He felt pretty blue. Next day in New York he
iooked up a guy he knew and they went out and had a few
drinks and found ’em some skirts and the day after that he
was sitting on a bench in Union Square with a headache
and not a red cent in his jeans. He found the stubs of the
tickets to the show at the Belasco theatre he^d taken Janey
to and put them carefully in the cigarbox with the other
junkt


         58

496
    Next boat he shipped on was the North Star bound for
St. Nazaire with a cargo listed as canned goods that every-
body knew was shell caps, and bonuses for the crew on
account of the danger of going through the zone. She was
a crazy whaleback, had been an oreboat on the Great Lakes,
leaked so they had to have the pumps going half the time^
but Joe liked the bunch and the chow was darn good and
old Caphi Perry was as fine an old seadog as you^d like to
see, had been living ashore for a couple of years down at
Atlantic Highlands but had come back on account of the
                                                                                     she’d
big money to try to make a pile for his daughter j
get the insurance anyway, Joe heard him tell the mate with
a wheezy laugh. They had a smooth winter crossing, the
wind behind them all the way right till they were in the
Bay of Biscay. It was very cold and the sea was dead
calm when they came in sight of the French coast, low and
sandy at the mouth of the Loire.
    They had the flag up and the ship’s name signal and
Sparks was working overtime and they sure were nervous
on account of mines until the French patrol boat came out
and led the way through the winding channel into the
river between the minefields.
    When they saw the spires and the long rows of grey
houses and the little clustered chimney pots of St. Nazaire
in the smoky dusk the boys were going round slapping
each other on the back and saying they sure would get
cockeyed this night.
    But what happened was that they anchored out in the
stream and Cap’n Perry and the First Mate went ashore in
the dingy and they didn’t dock till two days later on ac
count of there being no room at the wharves. When they
did get ashore to take a look at the mademosels and the
vin rouge, they all had to show their seaman’s passports
when they left the wharf to a redfaced man in a blue uni-
form trimmed with red who had a tremendous pair of
pointed black moustaches. Blackie Flannagan had crouched

                                                                                 59

497
down behind him and somebody was just going to give him
a shove over his back when the Chief yelled at them from

across the street, ^Tor Chris’ sake, can’t you c            s see

that’s a frog cop ? You don’t want to get run in right on the
wharf, do you?”
    Joe and Flannagan got separated from the others and
walked around to look the town over. The streets were
paved With cobblestones and awful little and funny and
the old women all wore tight white lace caps and every-
thing looked kinder falling down. Even the dogs looked
like frog dogs. They ended up in a place marked American
Bar but it didn’t look like any bar they’d ever seen in the
States. They bought a bottle of cognac for a starter. Flan-
nagan said the town looked like Hoboken, but Joe said it
looked kinder like Villefranche where he’d been when he
was in the navy. American dollars went pretty far if you
knew enough not to let ’em gyp you.
   Another American came in to the dump and they got to
talking and he said he’d been torpedoed on the Oswego
right in the mouth of the Loire river. They gave him some
of the cognac and he said how it had been, that Uboat had
blowed the poor old Oswego clear outa the water and
when smoke cleared away she’d split right in two and
closed up like a jackknife. They had another bottle of
cognac on that and then the feller took them to a house
he said he knew and there they found some more of the
bunch drinking beer and dancing around with the girls.
   Joe was having a good time parleyvooing with one of
the girls, he’d point to something and she’d tell him how
to say it in French, when a fight started someway and the
frog cops came and the bunch had to run for it. They all
got back aboard ship ahead of the cops but they came and
stood on th6 dock and jabbered for about a half an hour
until old Cap’n Perry, who’d just gotten back from town
in a horsecab, told ’em where to get off.
    The trip back was slow but pretty good. They were only
        6o

498
a week in Hampton Roads, loaded up with a cargo of steel
ingots and explosives, and cleared for Cardiff. It was
nervous work. The Cap’n took a northerly course and they
got into a lot of fog. Then after a solid week of icy cold
weather with a huge following sea they sighted Rockall.
Joe was at the wheel. The green hand in the crowsnest
yelled out, ^^Battleship ahead,^^ and old Cap’n Perry stood
on the bridge laughing, looking at the rock through his

binoculars.
    Next morning they raised the Hebrides to the south.
Cap^n Perry was just pointing out the Butt of Lewis to the
mate when the lookout in the bow gave a scared hail. It
was a submarine all right. You could see first the periscope

trailing a white feather of foam, then the dripping conning
tower. The submarine had hardly gotten to the surface
when she started firing across the North Sturms bows with
a small gun that the squareheads manned while decks were

still awash. Joe went running aft to run up the flag, al-
though they had the flag painted amidships on either side

of the boat. The engineroom bells jingled as Cap^n Perry
threw her into full speed astern. The jerries stopped firing
and four of them came on board in a collapsible punt.
All hands had their life preservers on and some of the
men were going below for their duffle when the fritz officer
who came aboard shouted in English that they had five
minutes to abandon the ship. Cap’n Perry handed over the

ship’s papers, the boats were lowered like winking as the
blocks were well oiled. Something made Joe run back up

to the boat deck and cut the lashings on the liferafts with

his jackknife, so he and Cap’n Perry and the ship’s cat
were the last to leave the North Star^ The jerries had
 planted bombs in the engine room and were rowing back

 to the submarine like the devil was after them. The Cap’n’s
 boat had hardly pushed off when the explosion lammed
 them a blow on the side of the head. The boat swamped
 and before they knew what had hit them they were swim-

                                                                                  61

499
/ning in the icy water among all kinds of planking and
junk. Two of the boats were still afloat. The old North
Star was sinking quietly with the flag flying and the signal--

flags blowing out prettily in the light breeze. They must
have been half an hour or an hour in the water. After the
ship had sunk they managed to get onto the liferafts and
the mate’s boat and the Chiefs boat took them in tow.
Cap’n Perry called the roll. There wasn’t a soul missing.
The submarine had submerged and gone some time ago.
The men in the boats started pulling towards shore. Till
nightfall the strong tide was carrying them in fast towards
the Pentland Firth. In the last dusk they could see the tall
headlands of the Orkneys, But when the tide changed they
couldn’t make headway against it. The men in the boats
and the men in the rafts took turn and turn about at the
oars but they couldn’t buck the terrible ebb. Somebody
said the tide ran eight knots an hour in there. It was a
pretty bad night. With the first dawn they caught sight of
a scoutcruiser bearing down on them. Her searchlight
glared suddenly in their faces making everything look
black again. The Britishers took ’em on board and hustled
them down into the engineroom to get warm. A redfaced
steward came down with a bucket of steaming tea with rum
In it and served it out with a ladle.
    The scoutcruiser took ’em into Glasgow, pretty well
shaken up by the chop of the Irish Sea, and they all stood
around In the drizzle on the dock while Cap’n Perry went
to find the American consul. Joe was getting numb in the
feet standing stiU and tried to walk across to the Iron gates
opposite the wharf house to take a squint down the street,
but an elderly man In a uniform poked a bayonet at his
belly and he stopped. Joe went back to the crowd and told
’em how they were prisoners there like they were fritzes.
Jez, it made ’em sore. Flannagan started telling about how
the frogs had arrested him one time for getting Into a
 fight with an orangeman in a bar in Marseilles and had
         62

500
been ready to shoot him because they said the Irish were

all pro-German. Joe told about how the limeys had rut
him in in Liverpool. They were all grousing about how
the whole business was a lousy deal when Ben Tarbell the
mate turned up with an old guy from the consulate and
told ^em to come along.
    They had to troop half across town through street?
black dark for fear of airraids and slimy with rain^ to a
long tarpaper shack inside a barbedwire enclosure. Ben
Tarbell told the boys he was sorry but they^d have to stay
there for the present, and that he was trying to get the
consul to do something about it and the old man had cabled
the owners to try to get ’em some pay. Some girls from
the Red Cross brought them grub, mostly bread and mar-
malade and meatpaste, nothing you could really sink your
teeth into, and some thin blankets. They stayed in that
damn place for twelve days, playing poker and yarning
and reading old newspapers. Evenings sometimes a frousy
halfdrunk woman would get past the old guard and peek

in the door of the shack and beckon one of the men out

into the foggy darkness behind the latrines somewhere.
Some of the guys were disgusted and wouldn’t go.
    They’d been shut up in there so long that when the
mate finally came around and told ’em they were going
home they didn’t have enough spunk left in ’em to yell
They went across the town packed with traffic and gas-

 flare in the fog again and on board a new 6000 ton

 freighter, the Vicksburg^ that had just unloaded a cargo

 o-f cotton. It felt funny being a passenger and being able

 to lay around all day on the trip home.
     Joe was lying out on the hatchcover the first sunny day
 they’d had when old Cap’n Perry came up to him. Joe
 got to his feet. Cap’n Perry said he hadn’t had a chance

 to tell him what he thought of him for having the presence

 of mind to cut the lashings on those rafts and that half the
 men on the boat owed their lives to him. He said Joe wa^

                                                                                  63

501
a bright boy and ought to start studying how to get out

oi the focastle and that the American merchant marine
was growing every day on account of the war and young
fellers like him were just what they needed for officers,
^^You remind me, boy,” he said, ^Vhen we get to Hampton
Roads and Vl\ see what I can do on the next ship I getc
You could get your third mate’s ticket right now with a

little time m shore school.” Joe grinned and said he sure
would like to. It made him feel good the whole trip. He
couldn’t wait to go and see Del and tell her he wasn’t in
the focastle any more. Dod gast it, he was tired of being
treated like a jailbird all his life.
    The Vicksburg docked at Newport News. Hampton
Roads was fuller of shipping than Joe had ever seen it.
Along the wharves everybody was talking about the
T>eutschLand that had just unloaded a cargo of dyes in
Baltimore, When Joe got paid off he wouldn’t even take
a drink with his shipmates but hustled down to the £en*y
station to get the ferry for Norfolk. Jez, the old ferry
seemed slow. It was about &.ve o’clock a Saturday after-
noon when he got into Norfolk. Walking down the street
he was scared she wouldn’t be home yet.
    Del was home and seemed glad to see him. She said
she had a date that night but he teased her into breaking
it oiff. After all, weren’t they engaged to be married? They
went out and had a sundae at an icecream parlor and she
told him all about her new job with the Duponts and how
she was getting ten more a week and how all the boys she
knew and several girls were working in the munition fac-
tories and how some of ’em^ were making fifteen dollars a
day and they were buying cars and the boy she’d had a
date with that night had a Packard. It took a long time for
Joe to get around to tell her about what old Cap’n Perry
had said und she was all excited about his having been
torpedoed and said why didn’t he go and get a job over at
Uew^art News in the shipyard md make real imney,* she

502
didn^t like the icfea of his being torpedoed every minute^
but Joe said he hated to leave the sea now that there
was a chance of getting ahead. She asked him how much
he’d make as third mate on a freighter and he said a
hundred and twentyfive a month but there’d always be
bonuses for the zone and there were a lot of new ships
being built and he thought the prospects pretty good all
around.
    Del screwed her ^ace up in a funny way and said she
didn’t know how she’d like having a husband who was:
away from home all the time, but she went into e phone
booth and called the other boy up and broke off the date
she had with him. They went back to Del’s house and
she cooked up a bite of supper. Her folks had gone over
to Fortress Monroe to eat with an aunt of hers. It made
Joe feel good to see her with an apron on bustling around
the kitchen. She let him kiss her a couple of times but
when he went up behind her and hugged her and pulled
her face back and kissed her, she said not to do that, it
made her feel all out of breath. The dark smell of her
hair and the feel of her skin that was white like milk
against his lips made him feel giddy. It was a relief when
they went out on the street in the keen northwest wind
again. He bought her a box of Saturday night candies at
a drugstore. They went to see a bill of vaudeville and
movies at the Colonial. The Belgian war pictures were
awful exciting and Del said wasn’t it terrible and Joe
started to tell her about what a guy he knew had told him
about being in an air raid in London but she didn’t listen.
    When he kissed her goodnight in the hall, Joe felt
 awful hot and pressed her up in the corner by the hatrack
 and tried to get his hand under her skirt but she said not

 till they were married and he said with his mouth against

 hers, when would they get married and she said they’d get
 married as soon as he got his new job.
     Just then they heard the key in the latch just beside

                                                                                  65

503
them and she pulled him Into the parlor and whispered

not to say anything about their being engaged just yet. It
was DePs old man and her mother and her two kid sisters
and the old man gave Joe a mean look and the kid sisters
giggled and Joe went away feeling fussed. It was early

yet but Joe felt too het up to sleep so he walked around
a little and then went by the Stirps^ house to see If Will
was in town. Will was in Baltimore looking for a job;, but
old Mrs. Stirp said if he didn’t have nowhere to go and
wanted to sleep in Will’s bed he was welcome, but he
couldn’t sleep for thinking of Del and how smart she was
and how she felt in his arms and how the smell of her
hair made him feel crazy and how much he wanted her.
    First thing he did Monday morning was to go over to
Newport Nev/s and see Cap’n Perry. The old man was
darn nice to him, asked him about his schooling and his
folks. When Joe said he was old Cap’n Joe Williams’ son,
Cap’n Perry couldn’t do enough for him. Him and Joe’s
old man had been on the Albert and Mary Smith together
In the old clipper ship days. He said he’d have a berth for
Joe as junior ofEcer on the Henry B. Higginbotham as
soon as she’d finished repairs and he must go to work
at shore school over in Norfolk and get ready to go before
the licensing board and get his ticket. He’d coach him
up on the fine points himself. When he left the old man
said, ^^Ma boy, if you work like you oughter, bein’ your
Dad’s son, an’ this war keeps up, you’ll be master of
your own vessel In five years. I’ll guarantee it.”
    Joe couldn’t wait to get hold of Del and tell her about
It, That night he took her to the movies to see the Four
Horsemen. It was darned exciting, they held hands all
through and he kept his leg pressed against her plump
little leg. Seeing it with her and the war and everything
flickering on the screen and the music like In church and
her hair against his cheek and being pressed close to her
 a little sweaty in the warm dark like to went to his head.
         66

504
When the picture was over he felt he’d go crazy if h^
couldn’t have her right away. She was kinder kidding hiiu
along and he got sore and said God damn it, they’d have
to get married right away or else he was through. She’d
held out on him just about long enough. She began to cry
and turned her face up to him all wet with tears and said

if he really loved her he wouldn’t talk like that and that
that was no way to talk to a lady and he felt awful bad
about it. When they got back to her folks’ house, every-
body had gone to bed and they went out in the pantr)^
back of the kitchen without turning the light on and she
let him love her up. She said honestly she loved him so
much she’d let him do anything he wanted only she kne\N
he wouldn’t respect her if she did. She said she was sick
of living at home and having her mother keep tabs on her
ail the time, and she’d tell her folks in the morning about
how he’d got a job as a ship’s officer and they had to get
married before he left and that he must get him his uni-
form right away.
    When Joe left the house to look around and find a flop,
he was walking on air. He hadn’t planned to get married
that soon but what the hell, a man had to have a girl of

his own. He began doping out what he’d write Janey
about it, but he decided she wouldn’t like it and that he’d
better not write. He wished Janey wasn’t getting so kind
of uppish, but after all she was making a big success of
business. When he was skipper of his own ship she’d think

it was all great.
    Joe was two months ashore that time. He went to shore
school every day, lived at the Y.M.C.A. and didn’t take
a drink or shoot pool or anything. The pay he had saved
up from the two trips on the North Star was just about
 enough to swing it. Every week or so he went over to
 Newport News to talk it over with old Cap’n Perry who
 told him what kind of questions the examining board
 would ask him and what kind of papers he’d need. Joe

                                                                                  67

505
 yas pretty worried about his original A.B. certificate, but
 he had another now and recommendations from captains

 of ships he’d been on. What the hell, he’d been at sea
four years, it was about time he knew a little about run-
ning a ship. He almost worried himself sick over the ex-
amination, but when he was actually there standing before
the old birds on the board it wasn’t as bad as he thought

It ud be. When he actually got the third mate’s license
and showed it to Del, they were both of them pretty
tickled.
    Joe bought his uniform when he got an advance of pay.
From then on he was busy all day doing odd jobs round
the drydock for old Cap’n Perry who hadn’t gotten a crew
together yet. Then in the evenings he worked painting
up the little bedroom, kitchenette and bath he’d rented
for him and Del to live in when he was ashore. Del’s folks
insisted on having a church wedding and Will Stirp, who
was making fifteen dollars a day in a shipyard in Balti-
more, came down to be best man.
    Joe felt awful silly at the wedding and Will Stirp
had gotten hold of some whiskey and had a breath like
a distillery wagon and a couple of the other boys were
drunk and that made Del and her folks awful sore
and Del looked like she wanted to crown him all
through the service. When it was over Joe found he’d
wilted his collar and Del’s old man began pulling a lot
of jokes and her sisters giggled so much in their white
organdy dresses, he could have choked ’em. They went
back to the Matthews’ house and everybody was awful
stiff except Will Stirp and his friends who brought in a
bottle of whiskey and got old man Matthews cockeyed.
Mrs. Matthews ran ’em all out of the house and all the
old cats from the Ladies Aid rolled their eyes up and said,
“Could you imagine it?” And Joe and Del left in a
taxicab a feller he knew drove and everybody threw rice
at ithem and Joe found he had a sign reading Newlywed
        6?

506
pinned on the tail of his coat and Del cried and cried and
when they got to their apartment Del locked herself in
the bathroom and wouldn’t answer when he called and
he was afraid she’d fainted.
    Joe took off his new blue serge coat and his collar and
necktie and walked up and down not knowing what to
do. It was six o’clock in the evening. He had to be aboard
ship at midnight because they were sailing for France as
soon as it was day. He didn’t know what to do. He
thought maybe she’d want something to eat so he cooked
up some bacon and eggs on the stove. By the time every-
thing was cold and Joe was walking up and down cussing
under his breath, Del came out of the bathroom looking
all fresh and pink like nothing had happened. She said
she couldn’t eat anything but let’s go to a movie . . .

^^Butj honeybug,” said Joe, ^^I’ve got to pull out at twelve.”
She began to cry again and he flushed and felt awful
fussed. She snuggled up to him and said, ^^We won’t stay
for the feature. We’ll come back in time.” He grabbed
her and started hugging her but she held him off firmly
and said, ^^Later.”
    Joe couldn’t look at the picture. When they got back
to the apartment it was ten o’clock. She let him pull off
her clothes but she jumped into bed and wrapped the
bedclothes around her and whimpered that she was afraid
of having a baby, that he must wait till she found out what
to do to keep from having a baby. All she let him do was
rub up against her through the bedclothes and then sud-
denly it was ten of twelve and he had to jump into his
clothes and run down to the wharf. An old colored man
rowed him out to where his ship lay at anchor. It was a
sweetsmelling spring night without any moon. He heard
honking overhead and tried to squint up his eyes to see
the birds passing against the pale stars. ^^Them’s geese,
boss,” said the old colored man in a soft voice. When he
climbed onboard everybody started kidding him and de-

                                                                                 69

507
                                                                                        j



flared he looked all wore out. Joe didn’t know what to

say so he talked big and kidded back and lied like a

Hsh.


                                                  NEWSREEL XXI


                           Goodby Broadway
                                  Hello France
                           We\e ten million strong

    8 YEAR OLD BOY SHOT BY LAD WITH
                                       RIFLE

       the police have already notified us that any entertainment
in Pans must be brief and quietly conducted and not in public
\^iew and that we have already had more dances than we ought

       capitalization grown 104% while business expands 520%
       HAWAIIAN SUGAR CONTROL LOST BY
                                     GERMANS

       efforts of the Bolshevik Government to discuss the with-
drawal of the U. S. and allied forces from Russia through
negotiation for an armistice are attracting no serious attention

    BRITISH AIRMAN FIGHTS SIXTY FOES

                                                          TAKE 10 TOWNS
    SERBIANS ADVANCE 10 MILES ^
                                 MENACE PRILEP

            Good morning
                   Mr, Zif Zif Zif
            You^re surely looking fine
            Good morning
                   Mr, Zif Zif Zif
            With your fmr cut just as short as
                With your hmr cut just as short as
                    With your heir cut just as short as mine
         70

508
                 LENINE REPORTED ALIVE

AUDIENCE AT HIPPODROME TESTIMONIALS MOVED TO
                              CHEERS AND TEARS

        several diff,erent stories have come to me well authenti-
cated concerning the depth of Hmdenburg’s brutality, the de-
tails are too horrible for print.          They relate to outraged
womanhood and girlhood, suicide and blood of the innocent
that wet the feet of Hindenburg
    WAR DECREASES MARRIAGES AND BIRTHS
                       Oh ashes to ashes
                               And dust to dust
                       Ij the shrafnel dont get you
                               Then the eightyeights must



                               THE CAMERA EYE (29)


        the raindrops fall one by one out of the horsechestnut

tree over the arbor onto the table in the abandoned beer-

garden and the puddly gravel and my clipped skull where
my fingers move gently forward and back over the fuzzy

knobs and hollows

        spring and weVe just been swimming in the Marne

way off somewhere beyond the fat clouds on the horizon

they are hammering on a tin roof             in the rain in the

 spring after a swim in the Marne with that hammering to

 the north pounding the thought of death into our ears

        the winey thought of death stings in the spring blood

 that throbs in the sunburned neck up and down the belly

                                                                                  71

509
under the tight belt           hurries like cognac into the tips

of my toes and the lobes of my ears and my fingers stroking

the fuzzy closecropped skull

        shyly tingling fingers feel out the limits of the hard

immortal skull under the flesh                a deathshead and

skeleton sits wearing glasses in the arbor under the lucid

occasional raindrops inside the new khaki uniform inside
my twentyoneyearold body that’s been swimming in the

Marne in red and whitestriped trunks in Chalons in the

spring


     RICHARD ELLSWORTH SAVAGE


    The years Dick was little he never heard anything
about his Dad, but when he was doing his homework eve-
mngs up in his little room in the attic he’d start thinking
about him sometimes, he’d throw himself on the bed and
lie on his back trying to remember what he had been like
and Oak Park and everything before Mother had been so
unhappy and they had had to come east to live with Aunt
Beatrice. There was the smell of bay rum and cigarsmoke
and he was sitting on the back of an upholstered sofa be-
side a big man in a panama hat who shook the sofa when
he laughed} he held on to Dad’s back and punched his
arm and the muscle was hard like a chair or a table and
when Dad laughed he could feel it rumble in his back,
“Dicky, keep your dirty feet off my palm beach suit,” and
he was on his hands and knees in the sunlight that poured
through the lace curtains of the window trying to pick
the big puirple rostes off the carpet} they were all standing
itl front' of a red^ automobile and Dad’s face was red and he
         7a

510
smelt ot armpits and white sl^am was coming out aroundj
and people were saying Safetyvalve. Downstairs Dad and
Mummy were at dinner and there was company and wine
and a new butler and it must be awful funny because they
laughed so much and the knives and forks went click click
all the time 3 Dad found him in his nightgown peeking
through the portieres and came out awful funny and ex-
cited smelling like wine and whaled him and mother came
out and said^ ^^Henry, don’t strike the child/’ and they
stood hissing at one another in low voices behind the por-
tieres on account of company and Mummy had picked
Dick up and earned him upstairs crying in her evening
dress all lacy and frizzly and with big puffy silk sleeves^
touching silk put his teeth on edge, made him shuddey
all down his spine. He and Henry had had tan over-
coats with pockets in them like grownup overcoats and
tan caps and he’d lost the button off the top of his. Way
back there it was sunny and windy, Dick got tired and
sickyfeeling when he tried to remember back like that
and it got him so he couldn’t keep his mind on tomorrow’s
lessons and would pull out ^Hwenty Thousand Leagues
Under the Sea” that he had under the mattress because
Mother took books away when they weren’t just about
the lessons and would read just a little and then he’d for»
get everything reading and wouldn’t know his lessons the
next day.
    All the same he got along very well at school and the
teachers liked him, particularly Miss Teazle, the English
teacher, because he had nice manners and said little things
that weren’t fresh but that made them laugh. Miss Teazle
said he showed real feeling for English composition. One
Christmas he sent her a little rhyme he made up abqut
the Christ Child and the Three Kangs and she declared
he had a gift.
    The better he liked it in school the worse it was at home.
 Aunt Beatrice was always nag nag nag from morning till

                                                                                 73

511
flight. As i£ he didn’t know that he and mother were eating
her bread and sleeping under her roof, they paid board,
didn’t they? even if they didn’t pay as much as Major
and Mrs. Glen or Dr. Kern did, and they certainly did
enough work to pay for their keep anyway. He’d heard
Mrs. Glen saying when Dr. Atwood was calling and Aunt
Beatrice was out of the room how it was a shame that poor
Mrs. Savage, such a sweet woman, and a good church-
woman too, and the daughter of a general in the army,
had to work her fingers to the bone for her sister who
was only a fussy old maid and overcharged so, though
of course she did keep a very charming house and set an
excellent table, not like a boarding house at all, more like
a lovely refined private home, such a relief to find in
Trenton, that was such a commercial city so full of work-
                                            too bad that the daughters of
ing people and foreigners j
General Fllsworth should be reduced tc taking paying
guests. Dick felt Mrs. Glen might have said something
about his carrying out the ashes and shovelling snow and
all that. Anyway he didn’t think a highschool student
ought to have to take time from his studies to do the
chores.
   Dr. Atwood was the rector of St. Gabriel’s Episcopal
Church where Dick had to sing in the choir every Sunday
at two services while mother and his brother Henry S.,
who was three years older than he was and worked in a
drafting office in Philadelphia and only came home week-
ends, sat comfortably in a pew. Mother loved St. Gabriel’s
because it was so highchurch and they had processions and
even incense. Dick hated it on account of choirpractice and
having to keep his surplice clean and because he never
had any pocketmoney to shoot craps with behind the bench
in the vestry and he was always the one who had to stand
at the door and whisper, “Cheeze it,” if anybody was
coming.
    One Sunday, right after his thirteenth birthday, he’d
         74

512
walked home from church with his mother and Henry-
feeling hungry and wondering all the way if they were
going to have fried chicken for dinner. They were all
three stepping up onto the stoop, Mother leaning a little
on Dick’s arm and the purple and green poppies on her
wide hat jiggling in the October sunlight, when he saw
Aunt Beatrice’s thin face looking worriedly out through
the glass panel of the front door. “Leona,” she said in
an excited reproachful voice, “he’s here.” “Who, Beatrice
dear.? ’’“You know well enough    .  .   . I don’t know what
to do ... he says he wants to see you. I made him wait
in the lower hall on account of . . . er . . . our friends.”
    “Oh, God, Beatrice, haven’t I borne enough from that
man? ”
    Mother let herself drop onto the bench under the stags-
horn coatrack in the hall. Dick and Henry stared at the
white faces of the two women. Aunt Beatrice pursed up
her lips and said in a spiteful tone, “You boys had better
go out and walk round the block. I can’t have two big
hulks like you loafing round the house. You be back for
Sunday dinner at one thirty sharp . . . run along now.”
    “Why, what’s the matter with Aunt Beatrice?” asked
Dick as they walked off down the street. “Got the pip I
guess . . . she gives me a pain in the neck,” Henry said
in a superior tone.
    Dick walked along kicking at the pavement with his toes.
     “Say, we might go around and have a soda . . . they
have awful good sodas at Dryer’s.”
     “Got any dough?”
     Dick shook his head.
     “Well, you needn’t think I’m goin’ to treat you. . . .
 Jimminy criskets, Trenton’s a rotten town. ... In Phila-
 delphia I seen a drugstore with a sodafountain half a
block long.”
     “Aw, you.”
     “I bet you don’t remember when we lived in Oak
                                                                                  75

513
Park, Dick. .    . . Now Chicago's a fine town.” ^"^Sure I
do .   .  . and you an^ me going to kindergarden and Dad
being there and everything.”
    “HelPs bells, I wanta smoke.”
    ^^Mother^ll smell it on you.”
    ^^Don’t give a damn if she does.”
    When they got home Aunt Beatrice met them at the
front door looking sore as a crab and told them to go down
to the basement. Mother wanted to see them. The back

stairs smelt of Sunday dinner and sage chickenstuffing.
Thej hobbled down as slowly as possible, It must be about
Henry’s smoking. She was in the dark basement hall. By
the light of the gasjet against the wall Dick couldn’t make
out who the man was. Mother came up to them and they
could see that her eyes were red. ^^Boys, it’s your father,”
she said in a weak voice. The tears began running down
her face.
    The man had a grey shapeless head and his hair was
cut very short, the lids of his eyes were red and lashless
and his eyes were the same color as his face. Dick was
scared. It was somebody he’d known when he was little j
it couldn’t be Dad.
    “For God’s sake, no more waterworks, Leona,” the man
said in a whining voice. As he stood staring Into the boys’
faces his body wabbled a little as if he was weak in the
knees. “They’re good lookers both of them, Leona . . .
I guess they don’t think much of their poor old Dad.”
    They all stood there without saying anything in the
dark basement hall in the rich close smell of Sunday dinner
from the kitchen. Dick felt he ought to talk but something
had stuck In his throat. He found he was stuttering, “Ha-
ha-hav-have you been sick?”
    The man turned to Mother. “You’d better tell them all
about it when I’m gone . . . don’t spare me . . . no-
body’s ever spared me, . . . Don’t lopk at me as if I was
i ghost, boys, I won^ hixrt you.” A nervous tremor shook
         76

514
the lower part o£ his face. ^^All my life IVe always been
the one has gotten hurt. . . . Well, this is a long
way from Oak Park ... I just wanted to take a look at
you, good-by. ... I guess the likes of me had better go
out the basement door .    . . 1^11 meet you at the bank at
eleven sharp, Leona, and thafll be the last thing you’ll
ever have to do for me.”
    The gasjet went red when the door opened and flooded
the hall with reflected sunlight. Dick was shaking for fear
the man was going to kiss him, but all he did was give
them each a little trembly pat on the shoulder. His suit
hung loose on him and he seemed to have trouble lifting
his feet in their soft baggy shoes up the five stone steps to
the street.
    Mother closed the door sharply.
    ^^He’s going to Cuba/’ she said. ^^That’s the last time
^
we’ll see him. I hope God can forgive him for all this,
your poor mother never can ... at least he’s out of that
horrible place.” ^Where was he, Mom?” asked Henry in
a business like voice. ^^Atlanta.”
    Dick ran away and up to the top floor and into his own
room in the attic and threw himself on the bed sobbing.
    They none of them went down to dinner although they
were hungry and the stairs were rich with the smell of
roast chicken. When Pearl was washing up Dick tiptoed

into the kitchen and coaxed a big heaping plate of chicken
and stuffing and sweetpotatoes out of herj she said to run
along and eat it in the back yard because it was her day
out and she had the dishes to do. He sat on a dusty step-
ladder in the laundry eating. He could hardly get the
chicken down on account of the funny stiffness in his throat.
When he’d finished, Pearl made him help her wipe.




                                                                                  77

515
   That summer they got him a job as bellboy in a small

hotel at Bay Head that was run by a lady who was a
parishioner of Dr. Atwood’s. Before he left Major and
Mrs. Glen, who were Aunt Beatrice’s star boarders, gave
him a fivedollar bill for pocket money and a copy of the

‘^Little Shepherd of Kingdom Come” to read on the train.
Dr. Atwood asked him to stay after the bibleclass his last
Sunday and told him the parable of the talent, that Dick
knew very well already because Dr. Atwood preached on

it as a text four times every year, and showed him a letter
from the headmaster of Kent accepting him for the next
year as a scholarship pupil and told him that he must
work hard because God expected from each of us accord-
ing to our abilities. Then he told him a few things a grow-
ing boy ought to know and said he must avoid temptations
and always serve God with a clean body and a clean mind,
and keep himself pure for the lovely sweet girl he would
some day marry, and that anything else led only to mad-
ness and disease. Dick went away with his cheeks burning.
    It wasn’t so bad at the Bayview, but the guests and help
                                    about his own age there was only
were all old people 3
Skinny Murray the other bellhop, a tall sandyhaired boy
who never had anything to say. He was a couple of years
older than Dick. They slept on two cots in a small airless
room right up under the roof that would still be so hot
from the sun by bedtime they could hardly touch it.
 Through the thin partition they could hear the waitresses
in the next room rustling about and giggling as they went
to bed. Dick hated that sound and the smell of girls and
cheap facepowder that drifted in through the cracks in
the wall. The hottest nights he and Skinny would take
the screen out of the window and crawl out along the
gutter to a piece of flat roof there was over one of the
upper porches. There the mosquitoes would torment them,
 but it was better than trying to sleep on their cots. Once
 the girls were looking out of the window and saw them

         78

516
crawling along the gutter and made a great racket that
they were peeping and that they’d report them to the
manageress, and they were scared to death and made plans
all night about what they’d do if they were fired, they’d
go to Barnegat and get work on fishing boats; but the next
day the girls didn’t say anything about it. Dick was kinda
disappointed because he hated waiting on people and run-
ning up and down stairs answering bells.
    It was Skinny who got the idea they might make some
extra money selling fudge, because when Dick got a
package of fudge from his mother he sold it to one of the
waitresses for a quarter. So Mrs. Savage sent a package
of fresh fudge and panocha every week by parcel post that
Dick and Skinny sold to the guests in little boxes. Skinny
bought the boxes and did most of the work but Dick con-
vinced him it wouldn’t be fair for him to take more than
ten percent of the profits because he and his mother put
up the original capital.
    The next summer they made quite a thing of the fudge-
selling. Skinny did the work more than ever because Dick
had been to a private school and had been hobnobbing
with rich boys all winter whose parents had plenty of
money. Luckily none of them came to Bay Head for the
summer. He told Skinny all about the school and recited
ballads about St. John Hospitaller and Saint Christopher
he’d made up and that had been published In the school
paper; he told him about serving at the altar and the
beauty of the Christian Faith and about how he’d made
the outfield In the junior baseball team. Dick made Skinny
go to church with him every Sunday to the little Episcopal
chapel called St. Mary’s-by-the-Sea. Dick used to stay
after the service and discuss points of doctrine and cere-
mony with Mr. Thurlow the young minister and was
finally Invited to come home with him to dinner and meet
 his wife.
    The Thurlows lived in an unpainted peakedroofed bun-

                                                                                  79

517
 galow in the middle of a sandlot near the station, Mrs.
 Thurlow was a dark girl with a thin aquiline nose and
 bangs, who smoked cigarettes and hated Bay Head. She
 talked about how bored she was and how she shocked the
old lady parishioners and Dick thought she v/as wonderful.
She was a great reader of the Smart Set and The Black
Cat and books that were advanced, and poked fun at Ed-
win’s attempts to restore primitive Christianity to the
boardwalk, as she put it. Edwin Thurlow would look at her
fi om under the colorless lashes of his pale eyes and whis-
                                                                                       then
per meekly, “Hilda, you oughtn’t to talk like that” 5
he’d turn mildly to Dick and say, “Her bark is worse
than her bite, you know.” They got to be great friends
and Dick took to running around to their house whenever
he could get away from the hotel. He took Skinny around
a couple of times but Skinny seemed to feel that their
talk was too deep for him and would never stay long but
would shuffle off after explaining that he had to sell some
fudge.
    The next summer it was mostly the hope of seeing the
Thurlows that made Dick not mind going to work at the
Bayview where Mrs. Higgins gave him the job of room-
clerk with an increase of pay on account of his gentlemanly
manners. Dick was sixteen and his voice was changingj
he had dreams about things with girls and thought a lot
about sin and had a secret crush on Spike Culbertson, the
yellowhaired captain of his school ballteam. He hated
everything about his life, his aunt and the smell of her
boarding house, the thought of his father, his mother’s
flowergarden hats, not having enough money to buy good
clothes or go to fashionable summerresorts like the other
fellows did. All kinds of things got him terribly agitated
so that it was hard not to show it. The wabble of the wait-
resses’ hips and breasts while they were serving meals,
girls’ underwear in store windows, the smell of the bath-
houses and the salty tingle of a wet bathingsuit and the
        80

518
tanned skin of fellows and girls in bathingsuits lying out
in the sun on the beach.
    He’d been writing Edwin and Hilda long letters all
winter about anything that came into his head, but when
he actually saw them he felt funny and constrained. Hilda
was using a new kind of perfume that tickled his nosej
even when he was sitting at the table at lunch with them,
eating cold ham and potato salad from the delicatessen
and talking about the primitive litanies and gregorian
music he couldn’t help undressing them in his mind, think-
ing of them in bed naked, he hated the way he felt.
    Sunday afternoons Edwin went to Elberon to conduct
services in another little summer chapel. Hilda never went
and often invited Dick to go out for a walk with her or
come to tea. He and Hilda began to have a little world
between them that Edwin had nothing to do with, where
they only talked about him to poke fun at him. Dick began
to see Hilda in his queer horrid dreams. Hilda began to
calk about how she and Dick were really brother and sister,
how passionless people who never really wanted anything
couldn’t understand people like them. Those times Dick
didn’t get much chance to say anything. He and Hilda
would sit on the back stoop in the shade smoking Egyptian
Deities until they felt a little sick. Hilda’d say she didn’t
care whether the damn parishioners saw her or not and
talk and talk about how she wanted something to happen
in her life, and smart clothes and to travel to foreign
countries and to have money to spend and not to have
to fuss with the housekeeping and how she felt sometimes
she could kill Edwin for his mild calfish manner.
    Edwin usually got back on a train that got in at 10:53
and, as Dick had Sunday evenings off from the hotel, he
and Hilda would eat supper alone together and then take
a walk along the beach. Hilda would take his arm and
                                 he’d wonder if she felt him tremble
walk close to him 5
whenever their ^egs touched.

                                                                                 81

519
   All week he’d think about those Sunday evenings. Some-

r.imes he’d tell himself that he wouldn’t go another time.
He’d stay up in his room and read Dumas or go out with
                             being alone with Hilda like that made
fellows he knew 5
him feel too rotten afterwards. Then one moonless night,
when they’d walked way down the beach beyond the rosy

fires of the picnickers, and were sitting side by side on the
sand talking about India’s Love Lyrics that Hilda had
been reading aloud that afternoon, she suddenly jumped
on him and mussed up his hair and stuck hei knees into

his stomach and began to run her hands over his body
under his shirt. She was strong for a girl, but he’d just
managed to push her off when he had to grab her by the
shoulders and pull her down on top of him. They neither
of them said anything but lay there in the sand breathing
hard. At last she whispered, “Dick, I mustn’t have a
baby. . . . We can’t afford it.         . . . That’s why Edwin
won’t sleep with me. Damn it, I want you, Dick. Don’t
you see how awful it all is?” While she was talking her
hands were burning him, moving down across his chest,
over his ribs, around the curve of his belly. “Don’t, Hilda,
don’t.” There were mosquitoes around their heads. The
long hissing invisible wash of the surf came almost to their
feet.
    That night Dick couldn’t go down to the train to meet
Edwin the way he usually did. He went back to the Bay-
view with his knees trembling, and threw himself on his
bed in his stuffy little room under the roof. He thought
of killing himself but he was afraid of going to hellj he
tried to pray, at least to remember the Lord’s Prayer.
He was terribly scared when he found he couldn’t even
remember the Lord’s Prayer. Maybe that was the sin
 against the Holy Ghost they had committed.
    The sky yvas grey and the birds were chirping outside
 before he got to sleep. All next day, as he sat holloweyed
 behind the desk, passing on the guests’ demands for ice-
         82

520
water and towels, answering inquiries about rooms and
traintimes, he was turning a poem over in his mind about
the scarlet of my sin and the scarlet of thy sin and dark
birds above the surging seawaves crying and damned souls
passionately sighing. When it was finished he showed the
poem to the Thurlows, Edwin wanted to know where
he got such morbid ideas, but was glad that faith and the
church triumphed in the end. Hilda laughed hysterically
and said he was a funny boy but that maybe he’d be a
writer someday.
    When Skinny came down for a two weeks’ vacation to
take the place of one of the new bellhops that was sick,
Dick talked very big to him about women and sin and
about how he was in love with a married woman. Skinny
said that wasn’t right because there were plenty of easy
women around who’d give a feller all the loving he
wanted. But when Dick found out that he’d never been
with a girl although he was two years older, he put on
so many airs about experience and sin, that one night
when they’d gone down to the drugstore for a soda. Skinny
picked up a couple of girls and they walked down the
beach with them. The girls were thirtyfive if they were a
day and Dick didn’t do anything but tell his girl about his
unhappy love affair and how he had to be faithful to his
love even though she was being unfaithful to him at the
very moment. She said he was too young to take things
serious like that and that a girl ought to be ashamed of her-
self who made a nice boy like him unhappy. “Jez, I’d
make a feller happy if I had the chanct,” she said and burst
out crying.
     Walking back to the Bayview, Skinny was worried for
fear he might have caught something, but Dick said physi-
cal things didn’t matter and that repentance was the key of
redemption. It turned out that Skinny did get sick because
later in the summer he wrote Dick that he was paying a
 doctor five dollars a week to cure him up and that he felt
                                                                                  83

521
terrible about it Dick and Hilda went on sinning Sunday
evenings when Edwin was conducting services in Elberon
and when Dick went back to school that fall he felt very
much the man of the world.
    In the Christmas vacation he went to stay with the
Thurlows in East Orange where Edwin was the assistant

to the rector of the church of St. John, Apostle. There,
at tea at the rector’s he met Hiram Halsey Cooper, a
Jersey City lawyer and politician who was interested in
High Church and first editions of Huysmans and who
asked Dick to come to see him. When Dick called Mr.
Cooper gave him a glass of sherry, showed him first edi-
tions of Beardsley and Huysmans and Austin Dobson,
sighed about his lost youth and offered him a job in his

office as soon as school was over. It turned out that Mr.
Cooper’s wife, who was dead, had been an Ellsworth and
a cousin of Dick’s mother’s. Dick promised to send him
copies of all his poems, and the articles he published in
the school paper.
   All the week he was with the Thurlows he was trying
to get to see Hilda alone, but she managed to avoid him.
He’d heard about French letters and wanted to tell her
about them, but it wasn’t until the last day that Edwin
had to go out and make parochial calls. This time it was
Dick who was the lover and Hilda who tried to hold him
off, but he made her take off her clothes and they laughed
and giggled together while they were making love. This
time they didn’t worry so much about sin and when Edwin
came home to supper he asked them what the joke was,
they seemed in such a good humor. Dick started telling a
lot of cock and bull stories about his Aunt Beatrice and
her boarders and they parted at the train in a gale of
laughter.
    That summer was the Baltimore convention. Mt*. Cooper
had rented a house there and entertained z great deal.
Dick’s job was to kay in the outer office and           polite to

         84.

522
everybody and take down people’s names. He wore a
blue serge suit and made a fine impression on everybody
with his wavy black hair that Hilda used to tell him was
like a raven’s wing, his candid blue eyes and his pink and
white complexion. What was going on was rather over his
head, but he soon discovered what people Mr. Cooper
really wanted to see and what people were merely to he
kidded along. Then when he and Mr. Cooper found them-
selves alone, Mr. Cooper would get out a bottle of
Amontillado and pour them each a glass and sit in a big
leather chair rubbing his forehead as if to rub the politics
out of his mind and start talking about literature and the

nineties and how he wished he was young again. It was
understood that he was going to advance Dick the money
to go through Harvard with.
    Dick had hardly gotten back to school as a senior the
next fall when he got a telegram from his mother: Come
home at once darling your poor father is dead. He didn’t

feel sorry but kind of ashamed, afraid of meeting any of

the masters or fellows who might ask him. questions. At
the railway station it seemed as if the train would nevei
come. It was Saturday and there were a couple of fellows

in his class at the station. Until the train came he thought
 of nothing else but dodging them. He sat stiff on his seat

 in the empty daycoach looking out at the russet October

 hills, all keyed up for fear somebody would speak to him.

 It was a relief to hurry out of the Grand Central Station

 into the crowded New York streets where nobody knew
 him, where he knew nobody. Crossing on the ferry he felt
 happy and adventurous. He began to dread getting home
 and deliberately missed the first train to Trenton. He went

 into the old dining room of the Pennsylvania Station and

 ate fried oysters and sweet corn for lunch and ordered a

 glass of sherry, half afraid the colored waiter wouldn’t

 serve him. He sat there a long time reading The Smart

 Set and drinking the sherry feeling like a man of the

                                                                                  8 ?

523
ivorld, a traveller on his own, but underneath it all was
the memory of that man^s trembling white hurt face, the
Way he’d walked up the area steps that day. The restaurant
gradually emptied. The waiter must be thinking it was
funny his sitting there that long. He paid his check, and
before he wanted to found himself on the train for
Trenton.
   At Aunt Beatrice’s house everything looked and smelt
the same. His mother was lying on the bed with the shades
down and a handkerchief soaked in eau de cologne on her
forehead. She showed him a photograph that he’d sent
from Havana, a withered man who looked too small for
his palm beach suit and panama hat. He’d been working
in the consulate as a clerk and had left a ten thousand
dollar life insurance in her favor. While they were talking
Henry came in loohng worried and sore. The two of them
went out in the back yard and smoked cigarettes together.
Henry said he was going to take Mother to live with
him in Philadelphia, get her away from Aunt Beatrice’s
nagging and this damn boardinghouse. He wanted Dick
to come too and go to the U. of P. Dick said no, he was
going to Harvard. Henry asked him how he w'’as going
to get the money. Dick said he’d make out all right, he
didn’t want any of the damned insurance. Henry said he
wasn’t going to touch it, that was Mother’s, and they went
back upstairs feeling about ready to sock each other in the
jaw. Dick felt better though, he could tell the fellows at
school that his father had been consul at Havana and had
died of a tropical fever.
    That summer Dick worked for Mr. Cooper at $25 a
week getting up a prospectus for an art museum he wanted
to found in Jersey City and delighted him so by dedicating
to him a verse translation of Horace’s poem about Mae-
cenas that he worked up with the help of the trot, that
Mr. Cooper made him a present of a thousand dollars to
                                           for the sake of form and so that
take him through college 3

524
Dick should feel his responsibilities he put it in the form
of a note maturing in five years at four percent interest.
    He spent his two weeks’ vacation with the Thurlows
at Bay Head. He’d hardly been able to wait going down^
on the train to see how Hilda would be, but everything was
different. Edwin didn’t have the paperwhite look he used
to havej he’d had a call as assistant in a rich church on
Long Island where the only thing that worried him was
that part of the congregation was low and wouldn’t allow
chanting or incense. He was comforting himself with the
thought that they did allow candles on the altar. Hilda
was changed too. Dick was worried to see that she and
Edwin held hands during supper. When they got alone
she told him that she and Edwin were very happy now
and that she was going to have a baby and that bygones
must be bygones. Dick stalked up and down and ran his
hands through his hair and talked darkly about death and
hellonearth and going to the devil as fast as he could but
Hilda just laughed and told him not to be silly, that he
was a goodlooking attractive boy and would find many nice
girls crazy to fall in love with him. Before he left they
had a long talk about religion and Dick told them with a
bitter stare at Hilda, that he’d lost his faith and only be-
lieved in Pan and Bacchus, the old gods of lust and drink.
Edwin was quite startled, but Hilda said it was all non-
sense and only growing pains. After he’d left he wrote a
very obscure poem full of classical references that he la>
belled, To a Common Prostitute and sent to Hilda, add-
ing a postscript that he was dedicating his life to Beauty
and Sin.
    Dick had an exam to repeat in Geometry which he’d
flunked in the spring and one in Advanced Latin that he
was taking for extra credits, so he went up to Cambridge a
week before college opened. He sent his trunk and suitcase
out by the transfer company from the South Station and
went out on the subway. He had on a new grey suit and a

                                                                                 87

525
new grey felt fiat and was afraid of losing the certified

cheque he had in his pocket for deposit in the Cambridge

bank. The glimpse of redbrick Boston and the state house
with its gold dome beyond the slatecolored Charles as the

train came out into the air to cross the bridge looked like

the places in foreign countries he and Hilda had talked
about going to. Kendall Square . . . Central Square . . .
                                                                                  he had
Harvard Square. The train didn’t go any further 5
to get out. Something about the sign on the turnstile Out
To The College Yard sent a chill down his spine. He
hadn’t been in Cambridge two hours before he discovered
that his felt hat ought to have been brown and old instead
of new and that getting a room in the Yard had been a
grave mistake for a freshman.




   Perhaps it was the result of living in the Yard that he
got to know all the wrong people, a couple of socialist
Jews in first year law, a graduate student from the middle-
west who was tahng his Ph.D. in Gothic, a Y.M.C.A. ad-
dict out from Dorchester who went to chapel every morn-
ing. He went out for Freshman rowing but didn’t make
any of the crews and took to rowing by himself in a wherry
three afternoons a week. The fellows he met down at the
boathouse were pleasant enough to him, but most of them
lived on the Gold Coast or in Beck and he never got much
further than hello and solong with them. He went to all
the football rallies and smokers and beer nights but he
never could get there without one of his Jewish friends or
a graduate student so he never met anybody there who was
anybody.
    One Sunday morning in the spring he ran into Freddy
Wigglesworth in the Union just ^ they were both going
in to breakfast y they aat down at the same table. Freddy,
an old Kent                   a junior now. He asked Dick wh^
         m

526
he was doing and who he knew, and appeared horrified by
what he heard.           dear boy ” he said, “there^s nothing
to do now but go out for the Monthly or the Advoca^te,

, .   . I don^t imagine the Crime would be much in your
line, would it?”
         was thinking of taking some of my stuff around, but
I hardly had the nerve.”
          wish you’d come around to see me last fall. . . .
Goodness, we owe it to the old school to get you started
right. Didn’t anybody tel^ you that nobody lived m the
Yard except seniors'^” Freddy shook his head sadly as he
drank his coffee.
    Afterwards they went around to Dick’s room and he
read some poems out loud. ^Why, I don’t think they’re so
bad,” said Freddy Wigglesworth, between puffs at a ciga-
rette. ^Tretty purple I’d say, though.     . . . You get a few
of them typed and I’ll take them around to R. G. .            .  .
Meet me at the Union at eight o’clock a week from Mon-
day night and we’ll go around to Copey’s.     .  . . Well, so
long, I must be going.” After he’d gone Dick walked up
and down his room, his heart thumping hard. He wanted
to talk to somebody, but he was sick of all the people he
knew around Cambridge, so he sat down and wrote Hilda
and Edwin a long letter with rhyming inserts about how
 pvell he was getting on at college.
    Monday night finally came around. Already trying to
tell himself not to be disappointed if Freddy Wigglesworth
forgot about the date, Dick Was on his way to the Union
a full hour before the time. The cavernous clatter and
smell of Mem, the funny stories of the boneheads at his
table, and Mr. Kanrich’s sweaty bald, head bobbing above
the brass instruments of the band in the gallery seemed
particularly dreary that evening.
    There were tulips in the trina Cambridge gardens, and
now and then a whiff of likes on the wind. Dicfc^s clothes
irked him5 his legs were heavy as* he* walked, afrotind atkl

                                                                                 89

527
around the blocks of yellow frame houses and grass door-
yards that he already knew too well. The blood pounding
through his veins seemed too fast and too hot to stand.
He must get out of Cambridge or go crazy. Of course at
eight sharp when he walked slowly up the Union steps
Wigglesworth hadn’t come yet. Dick went upstairs to ttie

library and picked up a book, but he was too nervous to
even read the title. He went downstairs again and stood
around in the hall. A fellow who worked next to him in
Physics I lab. came up and started to talk about something,
but Dick could hardly drag out an answer. The fellow
gave him a puzzled look and walked off. It was twenty
past eight. Of course he wasn’t coming, God damn him,
he’d been a fool to expect he’d come, a stuck up snob like
Wigglesworth wouldn’t keep a date with a fellow like him.
    Freddy Wigglesworth was standing in front of him,
with his hands in his pockets. ^Well, shall we Copify?” he
was saying.
   There was another fellow with him, a dreamy looking
boy with fluffy light gold hair and very pale blue eyes.
Dick couldn’t help staring at him he was so handsome.
‘Hhis is Blake. He’s my younger brother. . . . You’re in
the same class.” Blake Wigglesworth hardly looked at
Dick when they shook hands, but his mouth twisted up into
a lopsided smile. When they crossed the Yard in the early
summer dusk fellows were leaning out the windows yell-
ing “Rinehart O Rinehart” and grackles were making a
racket in the elms, and you could hear the screech of street-
                                                     but there was a complete
car wheels from Mass. Avenue j
hush in the lowceiling room lit with candles where a
scrubbylooking little man was reading aloud a story that
turned out to be Kipling’s “The Man Who Would be
King.” Everybody sat on the floor and was very intent.
Dick decided he was going to be a writer.
    Sophomore year Dick and Blake Wigglesworth began to
go around together. Dick had a room in Ridgely and Blake
         90

528
was always there. Dick suddenly found he liked colleg..
that the weeks were flying by. The Advocate and th»’
Monthly each published a poem of his that winter; he and
Ned, as he took to calling Blake Wigglesworth, had tea
and conversation about books and poets in the afternoons
and lit the room with candles. They hardly ever ate at
Mem any more, though Dick was signed up there. Dick
had no pocketmoney at all once he’d paid for his board
and tuition and the rent at Ridgely but Ned had a pretty

liberal allowance that went for both. The Wigglesv/orths
were well off; they often invited Dick to have Sunday din-
ner with them at Nahant. Ned’s father was a retired art

critic and had a white Vandyke beard; there was an Ital-

ian marble fireplace in the drawingroom over which hung
a painting of a madonna, two angels and some lilies that

the Wigglesworths believed to be by Botticelli, although
B.B., out of sheer malice, Mr. Wigglesworth would ex-

plain, insisted that it was by Botticini.
    Saturday nights Dick and Ned took to eating supper at

 the Thorndike in Boston and getting a little tight on spar-
 kling nebbiolo. Then they’d go to the theatre or the Old
 Howard.
     The next summer Hiram Halsey Cooper was campaign-

 ing for Wilson. In spite of Ned’s kidding letters, Dick
 found himself getting all worked up about the New Free-
 dom, Too Proud to Fight, Neutrality in Mind and Deed,

 Industrial Harmony between capital and labor, and
 worked twelve hours a day typing releases, jollying small-
 town newspaper editors into giving more space to Mr.
 Cooper’s speeches, branding Privilege, flaying the Inter-

 ests. It was a letdown to get back to the dying elms of the

 Yard, lectures that neither advocated anythmg, nor at-

 tacked anything, The Hill of Dreams and tea in the after-

 noons. He’d gotten a scholarship from the English depart-
 ment and he and Ned had a room together in a house on
  Garden Street. They had quite a bunch of friends who

                                                                                   91

529
were interested in English and Fine Arts and things like

that, who’d gather in their room in the late afternoon, and

sit late in the candlehght and the cigarettesmoke and the
incense in front of a bronze Buddha Ned had bought in
Chinatown when he was tight once, drinking tea and eat-
ing cake and talking. Ned never said anything unless the
talk came around to drinking or sailingships; whenever
politics or the war or anything like that came up he had a
way of closing his eyes and throwing back his head and
saying Blahblahblahblah.
    Election Day Dick was so exdted he cut all his classes.
In the afternoon he and Ned took a walk round the North
End, and out to the end of T wharf. It was a bitterly raw
grey day. They were talking about a plan they had, that
they never spoke about before people, of getting hold of
a small yawl or ketch after they’d graduated and follow-
ing the coast down to Florida and the West Indies and
then through the Panama Canal and out into the Pacific.
Ned had bought a book on navigation and started to study

it. That afternoon Ned was sore because Dick couldn’t seem
to keep his mind on talk about sailing and kept wondering
out loud how this state and that state was going to vote.
They ate supper grumpily at the Venice, that was crowded
for once, of cold scallopini and spaghetti; the service was
wretched. As soon as they’d finished one bottle of white
orvieto, Ned would order another; they left the restau-
rant walking stiffly and carefully, leaning against each other
a little. Disembodied faces swirled past them against the
pinkishgold dark of Hanover Street. They found them-
selves on the Common in the fringes of the crowd watch-
ing the bulletin board on the Boston Herald building.
“Who’s winningf Batter up. . . . Hurray for our side,”
Ned ke|^ yelling, “Don’t yorl know enough to know its
electioti night?” uman behind them said out of the comer
of his moufii. ^‘BkhblahWahblah,” brayed Ned in the man’s
face.

530
   Dick had to drag him off among the trees to avoid a

fight. “We’ll certainly be pinched if you go on like this,”
Dick was whispering earnestly in his ear. “And I want to
see the returns. Wilson might be winning.”
    “Let’s go to Frank Locke’s and have a drink.”
    Dick wanted to stay out with the crowd and see the re-
turns; he was exated and didn’t want to drink any more.
“It means we won’t go to war.” “Razer have a war,” said
Ned thickly, “be zo amuzing . . . but war or no war lez
have a lil drink on it.”
    The barkeep at Frank Locke’s wouldn’t serve them,
though he’d often served them before, and they were dis-
gruntedly on their way down Washington Street to an-
other bar when a boy ran past with an extra in four inch
black type Hughes Elected. “Hurray,” yelled Ned.
Dick put his hand over his mouth and they wrestled there

in the street while a hostile group of men gathered around
them. Dick could hear the flat unfriendly voices, “College
boys . . . Harvard men.” His hat fell off. Ned let go his
 hold to let him pick it up. A cop was elbowing his way
 through toward them. They both straightened up and
 walked off soberly, their faces red. “It’s all blahblahblah-

 blah,” whispered Ned under his breath. They walked
 along toward Scollay Square. Dick was sore.
     He didn’t like the looks of the crowd around Scollay
 Square either and wanted to go home to Cambridge, but
 Ned struck up a conversation with a thuggylooking indi-

 vidual and a sailor whose legs were weaving. “Say, Chub,

 let’s take ’em along to Mother Ely’s,” said the thuggylook-

 ing individual, poking the sailor in the ribs with his elbow,
 “Take it easy now, feller, take it easy,” the sailor kept

 muttering unsteacfily.
     “Go anywhere they don’t have all this blahblahblah-

 blah,” Ned was shouting, seesawing from one foot to the

 other. “Say, Ned, you’re drunk, come along back to Cam-

 bridge,” Dick whined desperately in his ear and tugged

                                                                                  93

531
at his arm, “They want to get you drunk and take your
money.”
   “Can’t get me drunk, I am drunk . . . blahblahblah-

blah,” whinnied Ned and took the sailor’s white cap and
put it on his head instead of his own hat.
   “Well, do what you damn please, I’m going.” Dick let
go Ned’s arm suddenly and walked away as fast as he
lould. He walked along across Beacon Hill, his ears ring-

ing, his head hot and thumping. He walked all the way

to Cambridge and got to his room shivering and tired, on
the edge of crying. He went to bed but he couldn’t sleep
and lay there all night cold and miserable even after he’d
piled the rug on top of the blankets, listening for every
«ound in the street.
    In tlie morning he got up with a headache and a sour
burntout feeling all through him. He was having some
coffee and a toasted roll at the counter under the Lam-poon
Building when Ned came in looking fresh and rosy with
his mouth all twisted up in a smile, “Well, my young po-
litico, Professor Wdlson was elected and we’ve missed out
on the sabre and epa\ilettes.” Dick grunted and went on
eating. “I was worried about you,” went on Ned airily,
’‘where did you disappear to?” “What do you think I
did? I went home and went to bed,” snapped Dick. “That
Barney turned out to be a very amusing fellow, a boxing
 instructor, if he didn’t have a weak heart he’d be welter-
 weight champion of New England. We ended up in a
 Turkish Bath ... a most curious place.” Dick felt like
 smashing him in the face. “I’ve got a lab period,” he said
 hoarsely and walked out of the lunchcounter.
     It was dusk before he went back to Ridgely. There was
 somebody in the room. It was Ned moving about the room
 iin the blue dusk. “Dick,” he began to mumble as soon as
 the door closed behind him, “"never be sore.” He stood in
 the middle of the room with his hands in his pockets sway-
 ing, “Never be sore, Dick, at things fellows do when
          94

532
                                                                             y



they^re drunk. . . . Never be sore at anything fellows do,
Be a good fellow and make me a cup of tea.’^ Dick filled
the kettle and lit the alcohol flame under it. ^^Fellow has
to do lotta damn fool things, Dick.”
                                                 picking up a sailor in Scol-
    ^^But people like that .  .
lay Square .  . so damn risky,” he said weakly.
    Ned swung around towards him laughing easily and
happily, “And you always told me I was a damn Backbay
snob.”
    Dick didn^t answer. He had dropped into the chair be-
side the table. He wasn’t sore any more. He was trying to
keep from crying. Ned had lain down on the couch and
was lifting first one leg and then the other above his head.
Dick sat staring at the blue alcohol flame of the lamp lis-
tening to the purring of the teakettle until the last dusk
faded to darkness and ashy light from the street began to
filter into the room.
    That winter Ned was drunk every evening. Dick made
the Monthly and The Advocate^ had poems reprinted
in The 'Literary Digest and The Conning Tower attended
meetings of the Boston Poetry Society, and was invited tc
dinner by Amy Lowell He and Ned argued a good deal
because Dick was a pacifist and Ned said what the hell he’d
join the Navy, it was all a lot of Blah anyway.
    In the Easter vacation, after the Armed Ship Bill had
passed Dick had a long talk with Mr. Cooper who w'anted
to get him a job in Washington, because he said a boy of hia
talent oughtn’t to endanger his career by joining the army
and already there was talk of conscription. Dick blushed
becomingly and said he felt it would be against his con-
science to help in the war in any way. They talked a long
time without getting anywhere about duty to the state and
party leadership and highest expediency. In the end Mr.
Cooper made him promise not to take any rash step with-
out consulting him. Back in Cambridge everybody was
drilling and going to lectures on military science. Dick

                                                                                 95

533
was finishing up the four year course in three years and
had to work hard, but nothing in the courses seemed to
mean anything any more. He managed to find time to
polish up a group of sonnets called Morituri Te Salutant
that he sent to a prize competition run by The Literary
Digest. It won the prize but the editors wrote back that
they would prefer a note of hope in the last sestet. Dick
put in the note of hope and sent the hundred dollars to
Mother to go to Atlantic City with. He discovered that if
he went into war work he could get his degree that spring
without taking any exams and went in to Boston one day
without saying anything to anybody and signed up in the
volunteer ambulance service.
   The night he told Ned that he was going to France they
got very drunk on orvieto wine in their room and talked
a great deal about how it was the fate of Youth and Beauty
and Love and Friendship to be mashed out by an earl)
death, while the old fat pompous fools would make merry
over their carcasses. In the pearly dawn they went out and
sat with a last bottle on one of the old tombstones in the
graveyard, on the corner of Harvard Square. They sat on
the cold tombstone a long time without saying anything,
only drinking, and after each drink threw their heads back
and softly bleated in unison Blahblahblahblah.




    Sailing for France on the Chicago in early June was like
suddenly having to give up a book he’d been reading and
hadn’t finished. Ned and his mother and Mr. Cooper and
the literary lad)/ considerably older than himself he’d slept
with several times rather uncomfortably in her double-
decker apartment on Central Park South, and his poetry
and his pacifist friends and the lights of the Esplanade
shakily reflected in the Charles, faded in his mind like
paragraphs in a wvel laid by unfinished. He was a little

         96

534
seasick and a little shy of the boat and the noisy boozing
crowd and the longfaced Red Cross women workers giv>
ing each other gooseflesh with stories of spitted Belgian
babies and Canadian officers crucified and elderly nuns
            inside he was coiled up tight as an overwound clock
raped 3
with wondering what it would be like over there.
    Bordeaux, the red Garonne, the pastelcolored streets of
old tall mansardroofed houses, the sunlight and shadow so
delicately blue and yellow, the names of the stations all out
of Shakespeare, the yellowbacked novels on the bookstands,
the bottles of wine in the buvettes, were like nothing heM
imagined. All the way to Paris the faintly bluegreen fields
were spattered scarlet with poppies like the first lines of a
            the little train jogged along in dactyls everything
poem 3                                                              3
seemed to fall into rhyme.
    They got to Paris too late to report at the Norton-^
 Harjes office. Dick left his bag in the room assigned him
 with two other fellows at the Hotel Mont Thabor and
 walked around the streets. It wasn’t dark yet. There was
 almost no traffic but the boulevards were full of strollers

 in the blue June dusk. As it got darker women leaned out
 towards them from behind all the trees, girls’ hands
 clutched their arms, here and there a dirty word in Eng-

 lish burst like a thrown egg above the nasal singsong of
 French. The' three of them walked arm in arm, a little

 scared and very aloof, their ears still ringing from the talk
 on the dangers of infection with syphilis and gonorrhea a
 medical officer had given the last night on the boat. They
 went back to the hotel early.
     Ed Schuyler, who knew French on account of having
 been to boarding school in Switzerland, shook his head as

  he was cleaning his teeth at the washstand and spluttered

 out through his toothbrush, ^^C’est la guerre.” ^Well, the

  first five years ’ll be the hardest,” said Dick, laughing.
  Fred Summers was an automobile mechanic from Kansas.
  He was sitting up in bed in his woolly underwear. ^Tel-

                                                                                   97

535
iers/^ he said, solemnly looking from one to the other^
‘^Thls ain’t a war. . . . It’s a goddam whorehouse.”
   In the morning they were up early and hurried through
their coffee and rolls and rushed out hot and cold with
excitement to the rue Frangois Premier to report. They
were told where to get their uniforms and cautioned to
keep away from wine and women and told to come back
in the afternoon. In the afternoon they were told to come
back next morning for their identity cards. The identity
cards took another day’s waiting around. In between they
drove around the Bois in horsecabs^ went to see Notre
Dame and the Conciergerie and the Sainte Chapelle and
out on the street car to Malmaison. Dick was furbishing
up his prepschool French and would sit in the mild sun-
light among the shabby white statues in the Tuileries Gar-
dens reading Les Dieux Ont Soif and Ulle des Pinguins.
He and Ed Schuyler and Fred stuck together and after
dining exceeding well every night for fear it might be their
last chance at a Paris meal, took a turn around the boule-
vards in the crowded horizonblue duskj they’d gotten to
the point of talking to the girls now and kidding them
along a little. Fred Summers had bought himself a prophy-
lactic kit and a set of smutty postalcards. He said the last
night before they left he was going to tear loose. When
 they got to the front he might get killed and then what^^
Dick said he liked talking to the girls but that the whole
business was too commercial and turned his stomach. Ed
Schuyler, who’d been nicknamed Frenchie and was getting
very continental in his ways, said that the street girls were
too naive.
    The last night before they left was bright moonlight, so
the Gothas came over. They were eating in a little res-
 taurant in Montmartre. The cashlady and the waiter made
 them all go down into the cellar when the sirens started
 wailing for the second time. There they met up with three
 youngish women named Suzette, Minette and Annette,

         98

536
When the little Honking fireengine went by to announce
that the raid was over it was already closing time and they
couldn’t get any more drinks at the bar; so the girls took
them to a closely shuttered house where they were ushered
into a big room with livercolored wallpaper that had green
roses on it. An old man in a green baize apron brought up
champagne and the girls began to sit on knees and ruffle
up hair. Summers got the prettiest girl and hauled her
right into the alcove where the bed was with a big mirror
above the whole length of it. Then he pulled the curtain.
Dick found himself stuck with the fattest and oldest one
and got disgusted. Her flesh felt like rubber. He gave her
ten francs and left.
     Hurrying down the black sloping street outside he ran

 into some Australiait officers who gave him a drink of
 whiskey out of a bottle and took him into another house
 where they tried to get a show put on, but the madam said

 the girls were all busy and the Australians were too drunk

 to pay attention anyway and started to wreck the place.

 Dick just managed to slip out before the gendarmes came.
 He was walking in the general direction of the hotel when

 there was another alerte and he found himself being
 yanked down into a subway by a lot of Belgians. There was

 a girl down there who was very pretty and Dick was trying

 to explain to her that she ought to go to a hotel with him
  when the man she was with, who was a colonel of Spahis

  in a red cloak covered with gold braid, came up, his waxed

  mustaches bristling with fury. Dick explained that it was

  all a mistake and there were apologies all around and they

  were all braves allies. They walked around several blocks^

  looking for some place to have a drink together, but every-

  thing was closed, so they parted regretfully at the door of

  Dick’s hotel. He went up to the room in splendid humor;

  there he found the other two glumly applying argyrol and

   Metchnikoff paste. Dick made a good tall story out of hi«

   adventures. But the other two said he’d been a hell of a

                                                                                    99

537
poor sport to walk out on a lady and hurt her sensitive

feelings. “FellerSj” began Fred Summers, looking in each

of their faces with his round eyes, “it ain’t a war, it’s a
goddam  . He couldn’t think of a word for it so Dick
turned out the light.



                                                      NEWSREEL XXII


  COMING YEAR PROMISES REBIRTH OF
                                     RAILROADS

                   DEBS IS GIVEN 3O YEARS IN PRISON

                     There^s a long long trail awinding
                              Into the land of my dreams
                     Where the nightingales are singing
                            ,And the white moon beams

        future generations will rise up and call those men blessed
who have the courage of their convictions, a proper appreciation
of the value of human life as contrasted with material gain, and
who, imbued with the spirit of brotherhood will lay hold of
the great opportunity

        BONDS BUY BULLETS BUY BONDS

        COPPERS INFLUENCED BY UNCERTAIN
                                        OUTLOOK
                WOMEN VOTE LIKE VETERAN POLITICIANS

         restore time honored meat combination dishes such as
hash, goulash, meat pies and liver and bacon. Every German
soldier carries a little clothesbrush in his pocket; first thing he
does when he lands in a prisoncage is to get out this brush and
start cleaning his clothes

            EMPLOYER MCrST PROVE WORKER IS ESSENTIAL
          100

538
                   Therms a long long mght of watting
                           Until my dreams all come true

        AGITATORS CAN^T GET AMERICAN
                                   PASSPORTS

       the two men out of the Transvaal district during the
voyage expressed tlieir opinion that the British and American
flags expressed nothing and, as far as they were concerned
could be sunk to the bottom of the Atlantic, and acknowledged
that they were socalled Nationalists, a type much resembling
the I.W.W. here.          have no intention’’ wrote Hearst, “of
meeting Governor Smith either publicly, privately, politically,
or socially, as I do not And any satisfaction

  KILLS HERSELF AT SEA; CROWDER IN CITY
                             AFTER SLACKERS
            Oh old Uncle Sam
                   He^s got the injantree
            He^s got the cavalree
                   He^s got artdleree
            And then by God we^ll all go to Chermanee
            God Helf Kaiser Bill!



                               THE CAMERA EYE (30)


        remembering the grey crooked fingers the thick drip

of blood off the canvas the bubbling when the lungcases

try to breathe the muddy scraps of flesh you put in the

ambulance alive and haul out dead

        three of us sit in the dry cement fountrin of the little

gardm with the pink walls in Recicourt
        No        there must he some way          they taught us

                                                                                lOI

539
Land of the Free           conscience      Give me liberty or

give me        Well they give us death

       sunny afternoon         through the faint aftersick of

mustardgas I smell the box the white roses and the white

phlox with a crimson eye         three brownandwhitestriped

snails hang with infinite delicacy from a honeysuckle*

branch overhead      up in the blue a sausageballoon grazes

drowsily like a tethered cow         there are drunken wasps

clinging to the tooripe pears that fall and squash when-

ever the near guns spew their heavy shells that go off

rumbling through the sky

        with a whir that makes you remember walking in the

Woods and starting a woodcock

        welltodo country people carefully built the walls and

the little backhouse with the cleanscrubbed seat and the

quartermoon in the door like the backhouse of an old

farm at home        carefully planted the garden and savored

the fruit and the flowers and carefully planned this war

        to hell With ^em         Patrick Henry in khaki submits

to shortarm insfection and 'puts all his pennies in a Liberty

 Loan        or give me

         arrives       shrapnel twanging its harps out of tiny

 powderpuff clouds invites us delicately to glor\/               we
 happy watching the careful movements of the snails in the

 afternoon sunlight talking in low voices about
         La Libre Belgique The Junius papers                Areop-

 agitica       Milton went blind for freedom of speech          If
          102

540
you h^t the words Democracy will understand       j-ven th

hankers and the clergymen       I        you we              must
                     When three men hold together
                     The kingdoms are less by three
        we are happy talking in low voices in the afternoon

sunlight about apres la guerre that our fingers our blood

our lungs our flesh under the dirty khaki feldgrau bleu

horizon might go on sweeten grow until we fall from the

tree ripe like the tooripe pears           the arrives know and

singing eclats sizzling gas shells          theirs is the power

and the glory

        or give me death


                                    RANDOLPH BOURNE


         Randolph Bourne
         came as an inhabitant of this earth
         without the pleasure of choosing his dwelling or
his career.
         He was a hunchback, grandson of a congregational
minister, born in 1886 in Bloomfield, New Jersey;
there he attended grammarschool and highschool.
         At the age of seventeen he went to work as secre-
tary to a Morristown businessman.
         He worked his way through Columbia working in
a pianola record factory in Newark, working as proof-
 reader, pianotuner, accompanist in a vocal studi ^ in
 Carnegie Hall.
         At Columbia he studied with John Dewey,
         got a travelling fellowship that took him to Eng-
 land Paris Rome Berlin Copenhagen,
                                                                                103

541
       wrote a book on the Gary schools.
       In Europe he heard music, a great deal of Wag-
ner and Scriabine
       and bought himself a black cape.

       This little sparrowlike man,
       tiny twisted bit of flesh in a black cape,
       always in pain and ailing,
       put a pebble in his sling
       and hit Goliath square in the forehead with it.

        War^ he wrote, is the health of the state.

        Half musician, half educational theorist (weak
health and being poor and twisted in body and on bad
terms with his people hadn’t spoiled the world for
Randolph Bourne; he was a happy man, loved die
Meistersinger and playing Bach with his long hands
that stretched so easily over the keys and pretty girls
and good food and evenings of talk. When he was
dying of pneumonia a friend brought him an eggnog;
Look at the yellow, its beautiful, he kept saying as his
life ebbed into delirium and fever. He was a happy
man.) Bourne seized with feverish intensity on the
ideas then going around at Columbia, he picked rosy
glasses out of the turgid jumble of John Dewey’s teach-
ing through which he saw clear and sharp
        the shining capitol of reformed democracy,
        Wilson’s New Freedom;
        but he was too good a mathematidanj he had to
work the equations out;

        with the result
        that in the crazy spring of 1917 he began to get
unpopular where his bread was buttered at the New
Republic;
        104

542
       for New Freedom read Conscriftiony for Democ-'
racyy Win the War, for Rejormy Safeguard the Morgan
Loans
       for Progress Civilization Education Service,
        Buy a Liberty Bond,
       Straff the Hun,
       Jail the Objectors.
        He resigned from The New Republic; only The
Seven Arts had the nerve to publish his articles against
the war. The backers of The Seven Arts took their
money elsewhere} friends didn’t like to be seen with
Bourne, his father wrote him begging him not to dis-
grace the family name. The rainbowtinted future of
reformed democracy went pop like a pricked soapbubble.
        The liberals scurried to Washington}
        some of his friends plead with him to climb up on
Schoolmaster Wilson’s sharabang} the war was great
fought from the swivel chairs of Mr. Creel’s bureau in
Washington.
        He was cartooned, shadowed by the espionage
service and the counter-espionage service} taking a walk
with two girl friends at Wood’s Hole he was arrested, a
trunk full of manuscript and letters was stolen from
him in Connecticut. (Force to the utmost, thundered
Schoolmaster Wilson)
    He didn’t live to see the big circus of the Peace of
Versailles or the purplish normalcy of the Ohio Gang.
    Six weeks after the armistice he died planning an.
essay on the foundations of future radicalism in Amer-
ica.

        If any man has a ghost
        Bourne has a ghost,
        a tiny twisted unscared ghost in a black cloak
        hopping along the grimy old brick and brownstone
 ittreets still left in downtown New York,
                                                                        lOJ

543
          irying out in a shrill soundless giggle:
          War is the health of the state.




                                                    NEWSREEL XXIII



                 If you dont like your Uncle Sammy

                 If you dont like the red white and blue

         smiles of patriotic Essex County will be concentrated and
teccrded at Branch Brook Park, Newark, N, J., tomorrow
afternoon. Bands will play while a vast throng marches hap-
pily to the rhythm of wartime anthems and airs. Mothers

 )f the nation’s sons will be there; wives, many of them carry-
ing babes born after their fathers sailed for the front, will
occupy a place in Essex County’s graphic pageant; relatives and
friends of the heroes who are carrying on the message of Free-
v^om will file past a battery of cameras and all will smile a
message recording installment no. 7 of Smiles Across the Sea,
The hour for these folks to start smiling is 2*30.

                       MOBS PLUNDER CITIES
 NEWSPAPERMAN LEADS THROUGH BARRAGE

         it was a pitiful sight at dusk every evening when the
whole population evacuated the city, going to sleep in the

fields until daylight. Old women and tiny children, cnppler
drawn in carts or wheeled in barrows men carrying chairs
bring those too feeble and old to walk

     JERSEY TROOPS TAKE WOMAN GUNNERS

         the trouble had its origin with the demand of the marine
 workers for an eight hour day

                  If you dont like the stars in Old Glory
                  Then go back to your land across the sea
                  To the land from which you came
                  Whatever he its name
           106

544
 G.O.P. LEADER ACCUSED OF DRAFT FRAUDS

               Ij you dont like the red white and blue
               Then dont act like the cur in the story
               Dont bite the hand thads jceding you



                                     EVELINE HUTCHINS


   Little Eveline and Arget and Lade and Gogo lived on
the top door o£ a yellowbrick house on the North Shore
Drive. Arget and Lade were little Eveline’s sisters. Gogo
was her little brother littler than Eveline; he had such
nice blue eyes but Miss Mathilda had horrid blue eyes.
On the floor below was Dr. Hutchins’ study where Your-
father mustn’t be disturbed, and Dearmother’s room where
she stayed all morning painting dressed in a lavender
smock. On the groundfloor vras the drawingroom and the
diningroom, where parishioners came and little children
must be seen and not heard, and at dinnertime you could
smell good things to eat and hear knives and forks and
tinkly companyvoices and Yourfather’s booming scary voice
and when Yourfather’s voice was going all the company-
voices were quiet. Yourfather was Dr. Hutchins but Our
Father art in heaven. When Yourfather stood beside the
bed at night to see that little girls said their prayers Eve-

line would close her eyes tightscared. It was only when
she’d hopped into bed and snuggled way down so that

the covers were right across her nose that she felt cosy.
    George was a dear although Adelaide and Margaret
teased him and said he was their Assistant like Mr. Bless-
ington was Father’s assistant. G«orge always caught things

 first and then they all had them. It was lovely when they
 had the measles and the mumps all at once. They stayed

 in bed and had hyacinths in pots and guinea pigs and Dear-»

                                                                                JO7

545
mother used to come up and read the Jungle Book and do
funny pictures and Yourfather -would come up and make
funny birdbeaks that opened out of paper and tell stories
he made up right out of his head and Dearmother said he
had said prayers for you children in church and that made
them feel fine and grownup.
    When they were all up and playing in the nursery
George caught something again and had monia on account
of getting cold on his chest and Yourfather was very sol-
emn and said not to grieve if God called little brother
away. But God brought little George back to them only
he was delicate after that and had to wear glasses, and
when Dearmother let Eveline help bathe him because Miss
Mathilda was having the measles too Eveline noticed he
had something funny there where she didn’t have anything.
She asked Dearmother if it was a mump, but Dearmother
scolded her and said she was a vulgar little girl to have
looked. “Hush, child, don’t ask questions.” Eveline got red
all over and cried and Adelaide and Margaret wouldn’t
speak to her for days on account of her being a vulgar little

girl-
    Summers they all went to Maine with Miss Mathilda
in a drawingroom. George and Eveline slept in the upper
and Adelaide and Margaret slept in the lowerj Miss Ma-
thilda was trainsick and didn’t close her eyes all night on
the sofa opposite. The train went rumblebump chug chug
and the trees and houses ran by, the front ones fast and
those way off very slow and at night the engine wailed
and the children couldn’t make out why the strong nice
tall conductor was so nice to Miss Mathilda who was so
hateful and trainsick. Maine smelt all woodsy and mother
and father were there to meet them and they all put or
khaki jumpers and went camping -with Father and the
guides. It was Eveline who learned to swim quicker than
anybody.
   Going back to Chicago it would beautumn and Mother
        io8

546
loved the lovely autumn foliage that made Miss Mathilda
feel so traurig on account of winter coming on, and the
frost on the grass beyond the shadows of the cars out of
the trainwmdow in the morning. At home Sam would be
scrubbing the enamel paint and Phoebe and Miss Mathilda
would be putting up curtains and the nursery would smell
traurig of mothballs. One fall Father started to read aloud
a little of the Ideals of the King every night after they
were all tucked into bed. All that winter Adelaide and
Margaret were King Arthur and Queen Whenever. Ev-
eline wanted to be Elaine the Fair, but Adelaide said she
couldn’t because her hair was mousy and she had a face
like a pie, so she had to be the Maiden Evelina.
    The Maiden Evelina used to go into Miss Mathilda’s
room when she was out and look at herself for a long time
in the lookingglass. Her hair wasn’t mousy^ it was quite

fair if only they would let her have it curly instead of in

pigtails and even if her eyes weren’t blue like George’s
they had little green specks in them. Her forehead was
noble. Miss Mathilda caught her staring like that into the
mirror one day.
    “Look at yourself too much and you’ll find you’re look-
ing at the devil,” said Miss Mathilda in her nasty stiff
German way.
   When Eveline was twelve years old they moved to g
bigger house over on Drexel Boulevard. Adelaide and
Margaret went east to boardingschool at New Hope and
Mother had to go spend the winter with friends at Santa
Fe on account of her health. It was fun eating breakfast
every morning with just Dad and George and Miss Ma-
thilda, who was getting elderly and paid more attention to
running the house and to, reading Sir Gilbert Parker’s nov-
els than to the children. Eveline didn’t like school but she
liked having Dad help her with her Latin evenings and
do algebra equations for her. She thought he was wonder-

iful when he preached so kind and good from the pulpit

                                                                               109

547
and was proud o£ being the minister's daughter at Sunday
afternoon bibieclass. She thought a great deal about the
fatherhood of God and the woman of Samaria and Joseph
of Arimathea and Baldur the beautiful and the Brother-
hood of Man and the apostle that Jesus loved. That Christ-
mas she took around a lot of baskets to poor people^s

houses. Poverty was dreadful and the poor were so scary
and why didn’t God do something about the problems and

evils of Chicago^ and the conditions, she’d ask her father.
He’d smile and say she was too young to worry about those
things yet. She called him Dad new and was his Pal.
    On her birthday Mother sent her a beautiful illustrated
book of the Blessed Damosel by Dante Gabriel Rossetti
with colored illustrations from his paintings and those of
Burne Jones. She used to say the name Dante Gabriel Ros-
setti over and over to herself like traurig she loved it so.
She started painting and writing little verses about choirs
of angels and little poor children at Christmastime. The
first picture she did in oils was a portrait of Elaine, the
Fair, that she sent her mother for Christmas. Everybody
said it showed great talent. When friends of Dad’s came
to dinner they’d say when they were introduced to her,
‘^So this is the talented one, is it?”
   Adelaide and Margaret were pretty scornful about all
that when they came home from school. They said the
house looked dowdy and nothing had any style to it in
Chicago, and wasn’t it awful being ministers’ daughters,
but of course Dad wasn’t like an ordinary minister in a
white tie, he was a Unitarian and very broad and more
like a prominent author or scientist. George was getting to
be a siilky little boy with dirty fingernails who never could
keep his necktie straight and was always breaking his
glasses. Eveline was working on a portrait of him the way
he had been ^hen he was little with blue eyes and gam-
boge curls. She used to cry over her paints she loved him
         no

548
so and little poor children she saw on the street. Every-
body said she ought to study art.
    It was Adelaide who first met Sally Emerson. One Eas-
ter they were going to put on Aglcin)aine and Selizette at
the church for charity. Miss Rodgers the French teacher
at Dr. Grant’s school was going to coach them and said
that they ought to ask Mrs. Philip Payne Emerson, who
had seen the original production abroad, about the scenery
                        and that besides her interest would be in-
and costumes 5
valuable to make it go; everything that Sally Emerson
was interested in went. The Hutchins girls were all excited
when Dr. Hutchins called up Mrs. Emerson on the tele-
phone and asked if Adelaide might come over some morn-
ing and ask her advice about some amateur theatricals.
They’d already sat down to lunch when Adelaide came
back, her eyes shining. She wouldn’t say much except that
Mrs. Philip Payne Emerson knew MatterlirJc intimately
and that she was coming to tea, but kept declaring, ^^She’s
the most stylish woman I ever met.”
    Aglavaine and Selizette didn’t turn out quite as the
Hutchins girls and Miss Rodgers had hoped, though every-
body said the scenery and costumes Eveline designed
showed real ability, but the week after the performance,
Eveline got a message one morning that Mrs. Emerson
had asked her to lunch that day and only her. Adelaide
and Margaret were so mad they wouldn’t speak to her.
She felt pretty shaky when she set off into the icybright
dusty day. At the last minute Adelaide had lent her a
 hat and Margaret her fur neckpiece, so that she wouldn’t
 disgrace them they said. By the time she got to the Emer-
 sons’ house she was chilled to the bone. She was ushered
 into a little dressing room with all kinds of brushes and
 combs and silver jars with powder and even rouge and
 toiletwaters in purple, green and pink bottles and left
 to take off her things. When she saw herself in the big
 mirror she almost screamed she looked so yoimg and pie-

                                                                                III

549
 faced and her dress was so horrid. The only thing that
 looked any good was the foxfur so she kept that on
 when she went into the big upstairs lounge with its deep
grey carpet soft underfoot and the sunlight pouring in
through French windows onto bright colors and the black
polished grandpiano. There were big bowls of freezias on
every table and yellow and pink French and German books
of reproductions of paintings. Even the sootbitten blocks
of Chicago houses flattened under the wind and the zero
sunlight looked faintly exciting and foreign through the
big pattern of the yellow lace curtains. In the rich smell of
the freezias there was a little expensive whisp of cigarette-
smoke.
    Sally Emerson came in smoking a cigarette and said;
^^Excuse me, my dear,” some wretched woman had had
her impaled on the telephone like a butterfly on a pin for
the last halfhour. They ate lunch at a little table the el-
derly colored man brought in all set and Eveline was
treated just like a grownup woman and a glass of port
poured out for her. She only dared take a sip but it was
delicious and the lunch was all crispy and creamy with
cheese grated on things and she would have eaten a lot
if she hadn’t felt so shy. Sally Emerson talked about how
clever Eveline’s costumes had been for the show and said
she must keep up her drawing and talked about how there
were as many people with artistic ability in Chicago as any-
where in the world and what was lacking was the milieu,
the atmosphere my dear, and that the social leaders were
all vidous numbskulls and that it was up to the few people
who cared about art to stick together and create the rich
beautiful milieu they needed, and about Paris, and about
Mary Garden, and Debussy. Eveline went home with her
bead reeling with names and pictures, little snatches out
of operas and in her nose the tickling smell of the freezias
mixed wifh toasted cheese and cigarettesmoke. When she
got home everytHng looked so cluttered and bare and ugly
         1X2

550
she burst out crying and wouldn’t answer any of her sis^
                          that made them
ters’ questions 3                          madder than ever.
    That June after school was over, they all went out to
Santa Fe to see her mother. She was awfully depressed out
at Santa Fe, the sun was so hot and the eroded hills were
so dry and dusty and Mother had gotten so washedout
looking and was reading theosophy and talking about God
and the beauty of soul of the Indians and Mexicans in a
way that made the children uncomfortable. Eveline read
a great many books that summer and hated going out. She
read Scott and Thackeray and W. J. Locke and Dumas and
when she found an old copy of Tnlhy in the house she
read it three times running. That started her seeing things
in Du Maurier illustrations instead of in kmghts and ladies.
    When she wasn’t reading she was lying flat on her back
dreaming out long stories about herself and Sally Emer-
son. She didn’t feel well most of the time and would drop
into long successions of horrid thoughts about people’s
bodies that made her feel nauseated. Adelaide and Mar-
garet told her what to do about her trouble every month
but she didn’t tell them how horrid it made her feel in-
side. She read the Bible and looked up uterus and words
like that in encyclopaedias and dictionaries. Then one night
she decided she wouldn’t stand it any more and went
through the medicine chest in the bathroom till she foun
a bottle marked Poison that had some kind of laudanum
compound in it. But she wanted to write a poem before
she died, she felt so lovely musically traurig about dying,
but she couldn’t seem to get the rhymes right and finally

fell asleep with her head on the paper. When she woke
up it was dawn and she was hunched pp over the table by
her window, stiff and chilly in her thin nightgown. She
slipped into bed shivering. Anyway she promised herself
that she’d keep the bottle and HU herself whenever things
seemed too filthy and horrid. That made her feel better.
    That fall Margaret and Adelaide went to Vassar. Eve-

551
Bne would have liked to go east too but everybody said she
was too young though sheM passed most of her college
board exams. She stayed in Chicago and went to artclasses
and lectures of one sort or another and did churchwork.

It was an unhappy winter. Sally Emerson seemed to have
forgotten her. The young people around the church were
    stuffy and conventional. Eveline got to hate the eve-

tiings at Drexel Boulevard, and all the vague Emerson
her father talked in his rich preacher^s boom. What she
liked best was the work she did at Hull House. Eric Eg-
strom gave drawingclasses there in the evenings and she
used to see him sometimes smoking a cigarette in the back
passage, leaning against the wall, looking very Norse, she
thought, in his grey smock full of bright fresh dabs of
paint. She’d sometimes smoke a cigarette with him ex-
changing a few words about Manet or Claude Monet’s in-
numerable haystacks, all the time feeling uneasy because
the conversation wasn’t more interesting and clever and
afraid somebody would come and find her smoking.
    Miss Mathilda said it was bad for a girl to be so dreamy
and wanted her to learn to sew.
    All Eveline thought about that winter was going to the

flirt Institute and trying to paint pictures of the Lake Front
that would be colored like Whistlers but be rich and full

like Millet drawings. Eric didn’t love her or else he
Wouldn’t be so friendly and aloof. She’d had her great
          now her life was over and she must devote herself
love 3
to art. She began to wear her hair screwed up in a knot
at the nape of her neck and when her sisters said it was
unbecoming she said she wanted it to be unbecoming. It
was at the Art Institute that her beautiful friendship with
Eleanor Stoddard began. Eveline was wearing her new
grey hat that she thought looked like something in a
Manet portrait and got to talking with such an interesting
 girl. When she went home she was so excited she wrote
 George, who was at boarding school, about it, saying she
          114

552
was the first girl she^d raet who really seemed to je^el
painting, that she could really talk about things with. And
then too she was redly doing something, and so independ-
ent and told things so comically. After all if love was going
to be denied her she could build her life on a beautiful
friendship,
    Eveline was getting to like it so much in Chicago, she
was really disappointed when the time came to leave for
the year’s trip abroad that Dr. Hutchins had been plan-
ing for his family for so many years. But New York and
getting on the Baltic and making out the tags for their
baggage and the funny smell of the staterooms made her
forget all about that. They had a rough trip and the boat
rolled a good deal, but they sat at the captain’s table and
the captain was a jovial Englishman and kept their spirits
up so that they hardly missed a meal. They landed in Liv-
erpool with twentythree pieces of baggage but lost the
shawlstrap that had the medicinechest in it on the way
down to London and had to spend their first morning get-
ting it from the Lost and Found Office at St. Pancras. In
London it was very foggy. George and Eveline went to
see the Elgin marbles and the Tower of London and ate
their lunches in A B C restaurants and had a fine^ time
riding in the tube. Dr. Hutchins only let them stay ten
days in Paris and most of that time they were making side
trips to see cathedrals. Notre Dame and Rheims and
Beauvais and Chartres with their bright glass and their
smell of incense in cold stone and the tall grey longfaced
statues nearly made Eveline a Catholic, They had a first

class compartment reserved all the way to Florence and a
 hamper with cold chicken in it and many bottles of Saint
 Galmier mineral water and they made tea on a little alco-
 hol lamp.
     That winter it rained a lot and the villa was chilly and
 the girls squabbled among themselves a good deal and
 Florence seemed to be full of nothing but old English la-

                                                                                115

553
diesj still Eveline drew from life and read Gordon Craig.
She didn’t know any young men and she hated the young

Italians with names out of Dante that hung around Ade-
laide and Margaret under the delusion that they were rich

heiresses. On the whole she was glad to go home with
mother a little earlier than the others who were going to
take a trip to Greece. They sailed from Antwerp on the
Kroonland. Eveline thought it was the happiest moment
of her life when she felt the deck tremble under her feet as
the steamer left the dock and the long rumble of the
whistle in her ears.
    Her mother didn’t go down to the diningsaloon the first
night out so that Eveline was a little embarrassed going in
to table all alone and had sat down and started eating her
soup before she noticed that the young man opposite her
was an Amencan and goodlooking. He had blue eyes and
crisp untidy tow hair. It was too wonderful when he turned
out to be from Chicago. His name was Dirk McArthur.
He’d been studying a year at Munich, but said he was get-
ting out before they threw him out. He and Eveline got
to be friends right away, they owned the boat after that.
It was a balmy crossing for April. They played shuffle-
board and decktenms and spent a lot of time in the bow
watching the sleek Atlantic waves curl and break under the
lunge of the ship.
    One moonlight night when the moon was plunging
westward through scudding spindrift the way the Kroon-
land was plunging through the uneasy swell, they climbed
up to the crowsnest. This was an adventure; Eveline
didn^t want to show she was scared. There was no watch
and they were alone a little giddy in the snug canvas
socket that smelt a little of sailors’ pipes. When Dirk put
his arm around her shoulders Eveline’s head began to reel.
She oughtn’t to let him. ‘^Gee, you’re a good sport, Eve-
line,” he said in a breathless voice. “I never knew a nice
girl who was a g6od sport before.” Without quite meaning
         ii6

554
CO she turned her face towards his. Their cheeks touched
and his mouth slid around and kissed her hard on her
mouth. She pushed him away with a jerk.
   ^^Hey, youTe not trying to throw me overboard, are
you?” he said, laughing. “Look, Eveline, won^t you give
me a little tiny kiss to show there’s no hard feeling. There’s
just you and me tonight on the whole broad Atlantic.”
    She kissed him scaredly on the chin. “Say, Eveline, I like
you so much. You’re the swellest girl.” She smiled at him
and suddenly he was hugging her tight, his legs hard and
strong against her legs, his hands spread over her back, his
lips trying to open her lips. She got her mouth away from
him. “No, no, please don’t,” she could hear her little
creaky voice saying.
    “All right, I’m sorry. ... No more caveman stuff,
honest injun, Evehne. But you mustn’t forget that you’re
the most attractive girl on the boat. ... I mean in the
World, you know how a feller feels.”
    He started down first. Letting herself down through the
opening in the bottom of the crowsnest she began to get
dizzy. She was falling. His arms tightened around her.
    “That’s all right, girly, your foot slipped,” he said
gruffly in her ear. “I’ve got you.”
    Her head was swimming, she couldn’t seem to make her
arms and legs work, she could hear her little moaning
voice, “Don’t drop me, Dirk, don’t drop me.”
    When they finally got down the ladder to the deck Dirk
leaned against the mast and let out a long breath, “Whee

. .   . you certainly gave me a scare, young lady.”
    “I’m so sorry,” she said. “It was silly of me to suddenly
get girlish like that. ... I must have fainted for a min-
ute.”
    “Gosh, I oughtn’t to have taken you up there.”
    “I’m glad you did,” Eveline saidj then she found her-
self blushing and hurried off down the main deck to the

first class entrance and the stateroom, where she had ta

                                                                               117

555
make up a story to explain to mother how sheM torn her

stocking.
    She couldn’t sleep that night but lay awake in her bunk
listening to the distant rhythm of the engines and the
creaking of the ship and the seethe of churned seas that
came in through the open porthole. She could still feel the

soft brush of his cheek and the sudden tightening muscles
of his arms around her shoulder. She knew now she was
terribly in love with Dirk and wished he’d propose to her.
But next morning she was really flattered when Judge
Ganchj a tall whitehaired lawyer from Salt Lake City with
a young red face and a breezy manner sat on the end of
her deckchair and talked to her by the hour about his early

life in the west and his unhappy marriage and politics and
Teddy Roosevelt and the progressive party. She’d rather
have been with Dirk, but it made her feel pretty and ex-
cited to see Dirk walk past with his nose out of joint while
she listened to Judge Ganch’s stories. She wished the trip
would never end.
    Back in Chicago she saw a lot of Dirk McArthur. He
always kissed her when he brought her home and he held
her very tight when he danced with her and sometimes
used to hold her hand and tell her what a nice girl she
was, but he never would say anything about getting mar-
ried. Once she met Sally Emerson at a dance she’d gone to
with Dirk she had to admit that she wasn’t doing any
painting, and Sally Emerson looked so disappointed that
Eveline felt quite ashamed and started talking fast about
Gordon Craig and an exhibition of Matisse she’d seen in
Pans, Sally Emerson was just leaving. A young man was
waiting to darce with Eveline. Sally Emerson took her
hand and said: ^^But, Eveline, you mustn’t forget that we
have high hopes of you.” And while she was dancing
everything that Sally Emerson stood for and how wonder-
ful she used to think her came sweeping through Eveline’s
           but driving home with Dirk all these thoughts were
head 5
         ii8

556
dazzled out of her In the glare of his headlights^ the strong
leap forward of the car on the pickup, the purr of the
motor, his arm around her, the great force pressing her
against him when they went around curves.
    It was a hot night, he drove west through endless iden-
tical suburbs out into the prairie. Eveline knew that they
ought to go home, everybody was back from Europe now
and theyM notice how late she got in, but she didn’t say
anything. It was only when he stopped the car that she
noticed that he was very drunk. He took out a flask and
offered her a drink. She shook her head. They’d stopped
in front of a white barn. In the reflection of the headlights
his shirtfront and his face and his mussed up hair all looked
chalky white. ^^You don’t love me, Dirk,” she said. ^^Sure
I do, love you better’n anybody . , . except myself . . .

that’s a trouble with me . . . love myself best.” She
rubbed her knuckles through his hair, You’re pretty silly,
do you know it?” ^^Ouch,” he said. It was starting to rain
so he turned the car around and made for Chicago,
    Eveline never knew exactly where it was they smashed
up, only that she was crawling out from under the seat
and that her dress was ruined and she wasn’t hurt only the
rain was streaking the headlights of the cars that stopped
along the road on either side of them. Dirk was sitting on
the mudguard of the first car that had stopped. “Are you
all right, Eveline?” he called shakily. “It’s only my dress,’*
she said. He was bleeding from a gash In his forehead and
he was holding his arm against his body as if he were cold.
Then it was all nightmare, telephoning Dad, getting Dirk
to the hospital, dodging the reporters, calling up Mr. Mc-
 Arthur to get him to set to work to keep it out of the
 morning papers. It was eight o’clock of a hot spring morn-
 ing when she got home wearing a raincoat one of the
 nurses had lent her over her ruined evening dress.
     The family was all at breakfast. Nobody said anything.
 Then Dad got to his feet and came forward, with his nap-

                                                                                119

557
kin in his hand, *‘My dear, I shan’t speak o£ your behavior
now, to say nothing of the pain and mortification you have
caused all of us. ... I can only say it would have served
  ou right if you had sustained serious injuries in such an
escapade. Go up and rest if you can.” Eveline went up-

tairs, doublelocked her door and threw herself sobbing on
the bed.
    As soon as they could, her mother and sisters hurried
her off to Santa Fe. It was hot and dusty there and she
hated it. She couldn’t stop thinking of Dirk. She began
telling people she believed in free love and lay for hours
on the bed in her room reading Swinburne and Laurence
Hope and dreaming Dirk was there. She got so she could
almost feel the insistent fingers of his hands spread over
the small of her back and his mouth like that night in the
crowsnest on the Kroonlmd. It was a kind of relief when
she came down with scarlet fever and had to lie in bed for
eight weeks in the isolation wing of the hospital. Every-
body sent her flowers and she read a lot of books on de-
sign and interior decorating and did watercolors.
    When she went up to Chicago for Adelaide’s wedding in
October she had a pale mature look. Eleanor cried out
when she kissed her, “My dear, you’ve grown stunningly
handsome.” She had one thing on her mind, to see Dirk
 jid get it over with. It was several days before they could
’Tange to meet because Dad had called him up and for-
bidden him to come to the house and they had a scene over
the telephone. They met in the lobby of The Drake. She
could see at a glance that Dirk had been hitting it up since
she’d seen him. He was a little drunk now. He had a
sheepish boyish look that made her feel like crying. “Well,
how’s Barney Oldfield?” she said, laughing. “Rotten, gee
ycai look stunning, Eveline. . . . Say The Follies oj
xgz4 are in town, a big New York hit. ... I got tickets,
do you mind if we go?” “No, k’ll be bully.”
    He ordered everything most expensive he could find on
         lao

558
the bill of fare, and champagne. She had something in
her throat that kept her from swallowing. She had to say

it before he got too drunk.
    ^^Dirk . . . this doesn’t sound very ladylike^ but like
this it’s too tiresome. . . . The way you acted last spring
I thought you liked me . . well, how much do you? 1
want to know.”
    Dirk put his glass down and turned red. Then he took
a deep breath and said, ^^Eveline, you know I’m not the
marrying kind . . . love ’em and leave ’em ’s more like

it. I can’t help how I am.”
    “I don’t mean I want you to marry me/’ her voice rose

shrilly out of control. She began to giggle.         don’t mean
I want to be made an honest woman. Anyway, there’s no
reason.” She was able to laugh more naturally, ^^Let’s for-
get it, ... I won’t tease you anymore.”
    ^Tou’re a good sport, Eveline. I always knew you were
a good sport.”
    Going down the aisle of the theatre he was so drunk
she had to put her hand under his elbow to keep him from
staggering. The music and cheap colors and jigglmg bod-

ies of the chorus girls all seemed to hit on some raw place

inside her, so that everything she saw hurt like sweet or
a jumpy tooth. Dirk kept talking all through, “See that

girl . . . second from the left on the back row, that’s
Queenie Frothingham. ... You understand, Evelme.
But I’ll tell you one thing, I never made a girl take the

first misstep. ... I haven’t got that to reproach myself

with.” The usher came down and asked him to quit talking

so loud, he was spoiling others’ enjoyment of the show.
 He gave her a dollar and said he’d be quiet as a mouse, as

 a little dumb mouse and suddenly went to sleep.
     At the end of the first act Eveline said she had to go
 home, said the doctor had told her she’d have to have

 plenty of sleep. He insisted on taking her to her door in

 a taxicab and then went off to go back to the show and to

                                                                                I2I

559
Queenie. Eveline lay awake all night stanng at her win-
dow. Next morning she was the first one down to breakfast.
When Dad came down she told him she^d have to go to
work and asked him to lend her a thousand dollars to start
an interior decorating business.




   The decorating business she started with Eleanor Stod-
dard in Chicago didn’t make as much money as Eveline
had hoped, and Eleanor was rather trying on the whole j
but they met such interesting people and went to parties
and first nights and openings of art exhibitions, and Sally
Emerson saw to it that they were very much in the van-
guard of things in Chicago socially. Eleanor kept complam-
mg that the young men Eveline collected were all so poor
and certainly more of a liability than an asset to the busi-
ness. Eveline had great faith in their all making names for
themselves, so that when Freddy Seargeant, who’d been
such a nuisance and had had to be lent money various
times, came through with an actual production of Tess of
the d^Urbervilles in New York, Eveline felt so trium-
phant she almost fell in love with him. Freddy was very
much in love with her and Eveline couldn’t decide what to
do about him. He was a dear and she was very fond of
him, but she couldn’t imagine marrying him and this would
be her first love affair and Freddy just didn’t seem to
carry her off her feet.
    What she did like was sitting up late talking to him
 over Rhine wine and seltzer in the Brevoort cafe that
 was full of such interesting people. Eveline would sit there
looking at him through the crinkling cigarettesmoke won-
dering whether she was going to have a love affair. He
was a tall thin man of about thirty with some splashes of
white in his thick black hair and a long pale face. He had
 a distinguished rather literary manner, used the broad
         122

560
so that people often thought he was from Boston, one of
the Back Bay Seargeants.
    One night they got to making plans for themselves and
the American theater. If they could get backing they’d
start a repertory theatre and do real American plays. He’d
be the American Stanislavsky and she’d be the American
Lady Gregory, and maybe the American Bakst too. When
the cafe closed she told him to go around by the other

staircase and go up to her room. She was exdted by the
idea of being alone in a hotel room with a young man and
thought how shocked Eleanor would be if she knew about

it. They smoked cigarettes and talked about the theatre a

little distractedly, and at last Freddy put his arm around
her waist and kissed her and asked if he could stay all

night. She let him kiss her but she could only think of
Dirk and told him please not this time, and he was verj-

contrite and begged her with tears in his eyes to forgive
him for sullying a beautiful" moment. She said she didn’t
mean that and to come back and have breakfast with her.

    After he’d gone she half wished she’d made him stay.
Her body tingled all over the way it used to when Dirk

put his arms around her and she wanted terribly to know
what making love was like. She took a cold bath and went

to bed. When she woke up and saw Freddy again she’d

decide whether she was in love with him. But the next
morning she got a telegram calling her home. Dad was

 seriously ill with diabetes. Freddy put her on the train.

 She’d expected that the parting would carry her off her

 feet, but it didn’t somehow.
     Dr. Hutchins got better and Eveline took him down to

 Santa Fe to recuperate. Her mother was sick most of the

 time too, and as Margaret and Adelaide were both married

 and George had gotten a job abroad with Hoover’s Belgian

 Relief, it seemed to be up to her to take care of the old peo-

 ple. She spent a dreamy unhappy year in spite of the great

 skeleton landscape and horsebacktrips and working al

                                                                                123

561
watercolors of Mexicans and Indian penitentes. She went
around the house ordering meals, attending to housekeep-

ing, irritated by the stupidity of seiwantgirls, making out
laundry lists.
    The only man she met there who made her seem alive
was Jose O’Riely. He was a Spaniard in spite of his Irish
name, a slender young man with a tobaccocolored face and
dark green eyes, who had somehow gotten married to a
stout Mexican woman who brought out a new squalling
brown infant every nine months. He was a painter and
lived by doing odd carpenter jobs and sometimes posing

as a model. Eveline got to talk to him one day when he
was painting the garage doors and asked him to pose for
her. He kept looking at the pastel she was doing of him
and telling her it was wretched, until she broke down and
med. He apologized in his stiff English and said she must
not be upset, that she had talent and that he’d teach her
to draw himself. He took her down to his house, an untidy

little shack in the Mexican part of town, where he intro-
duced her to Lola, his wife, who looked at her with scared
suspicious black eyes, and showed her his paintings, big
retablos painted on plaster that looked like Italian primi-
tives. ^^You see I paint martires,” he said, %Vit not Chris-
tian. I paint the martires of the working class under ex-
ploitation. Lola does not imderstand. She want me to paint
rich ladies like you and make plenty money. Which you
think is bestf^” Eveline flushed^ she didn’t like being classed
with the rich ladies. But the pictures thrilled her and she
                                                                                  she de-
said she would advertise them among her friends 5
cided sheM discovered a genius.
    O’Riely was grateful and wouldn’t take any money for
posing or criticizing her paintings after that, instead he
sometimes borrowed small sums as a friend. Even before
he started making love to her, she decided that this time it
must be a real affair. She’d go crazy if something didn’t
happen to her soon

         124

562
   The main diiSiculty was finding somewhere they could

go. Her studio was right back of the house and there was
the danger that her father or mother or friends coming to

call might break in on them any time. Then too Santa Fe
was a small place and people were already noticing how
often he went to her studio.
    One night when the Hutchins^ chauffeur was awayj they
climbed up to his room above the garage. It was pitch

black there and smelled of old pipes and soiled clothes.
Eveline was terrified to find sheM lost control of her own

         it was like going under ether. He was surprised to
self 5
find she was a virgin and was very kind and gentle, almost

apologetic. But she felt none of the ecstasy she had ex-
pected lying in his arms on the chauffeurs bedj it was
almost as if it had all happened before. Afterwards they

lay on the bed talking a long time in low intimate voices.
His manner had changed, he treated her gravely and in-

dulgently, like a child. He said he hated things to be se-

cret and sordid like that, it was brutalizing to them both.
He would find a place where they could meet in the open,

in the sun and air, not like criminals this way. He wanted

to draw her, the beautiful slenderness of her body would
be the inspiration of his painting and her lovely little round

 breasts. Then he looked her over carefully to see if her

 dress looked mussed and told her to run over to the house
                           and to take precautions if she didn’t want
 and go to bed 5
 to have a baby, though he would be proud to have her bear

 a child of his, particularly as she was rich enough to sup-

 port it. The idea horrified her and she felt it was coarse
 and unfeeling of him to talk about it lightly that way.
     They met all that winter a couple of times a week in a

 little deserted cabin that lay off the trail in the b^in of a

  imall stony canon back of the town. She would ride over
 and he would walk by a different road. They called it their

 desert island. Then one day Lola looked in his portfolios
 and found hundreds of drawings of the same naked girl;

                                                                                 I2S

563
she came up to the Hutchins’ house shaking and screaming
with the hair streaming down her face, looking for Eveline
and crying that she was going to kill her. Dr. Hutchins was
                         but though she was terribly frightened in-
thunderstruck 5
side, Eveline managed to keep cool and tell her father that
she had let O’Riely do drawings of her but that there’d
been nothing else between them, and that his wife was a
stupid ignorant Mexican and couldn’t imagine a man and a
woman being alone in a studio together without thinking
something disgusting. Although he scolded her for being
so imprudent Dad believed her and they managed to keep
the whole thing from Mother, but she only managed to
see Pepe once more after that. He shrugged his shoulders
and said what could he do, he couldn’t abandon his wife
and children to starve, poor as he was he had to live with
them, and a man had to have a woman to work for him
and cook^ he couldn’t live on romantic lifeclasses, he
had to eat, and Lola was a good woman but stupid and
untidy and had made him promise not to see Eveline again,
Eveline turned on her heel and left him before he was
through talking. She was glad she had a horse she could
jump on and ride away.



                             THE CAMERA EYE (31)


        a matrass covered with something from Vantine’s

makes a divan in the ladyphotographer’s studio               we

sit on the divan and on cushions on the floor and the long-

necked English actor reads the Song of Songs in rhythms

        and the ladyphotographer in breastplates and silk

Hoomers dances the Song of Songs in rhythms

          126

564
        the little girl in pink is a classical dancer with pan--

pipes but the hennahaired ladyphotographer dances th^i

Song of Songs in rhythms with winking bellybutton and

clash of breastplates in more oriental style

       stay muh with -fiahgons comfort muh with ahffles

        for I am sick of loeuve

        his left hand is under muh head and his rahght hand

doth embrace muh

        the semiretired actress who lived upstairs let out a

yell and then another               Burglars secondstoiy men

Good God she’s being attacked we men run up the

stairs poor woman she’s in hysterics       Its the wrong flat

the stairs are full of dicks outside they’re backing

up the waggon         All right men on one side girls on

the other what the hell kind of place is this anyway? Dicks

coming in all the windows dicks coming out of the kitchen-

f^tte

        the hennahaired ladyphotographer holds them at bay

draped in a portiere waving the telephone                Is this

Mr. Wickersham’s ofiBce?       District Attorney          trying

experience       a few friends             a little dance recital

in the most brutal manner prominent actress upstairs

in hysterics        allright ofEcer talk to the District Attor-

 ney he’ll tell you who I am who our friends are

        Dicks slink away waggon jangles to another street

 the English actor is sr^^'^ng             Only by the greatest

                                                                                127

565
control I kept muh temper the swine Pm terrible when

I^m aroused terrible

        and the Turkish consul and his friend who were

there incog belligerent nation Department of Justice

Espionage hunting radicals proGermans slipped quietly

out and the two of us ran down the stairs          and walked

fast downtown and crossed to Weehawken on the ferry

       it was a night of enormous fog through which moved

blunderingly the great blind shapes of steamboat sirens

from the lower bay

        in the bow of the ferry we breathed the rancid river-

breeze talking loud in a shouting laugh

        out of the quiet streets of Weehawken incredible

slanting viaducts lead up into the fog



                                     EVELINE HUTCHINS


    She felt half crazy until she got on the train to go back
mst. Mother and Dad didn’t want her to go^ but she
showed them a telegram she’d wired Eleanor to send her
offering her a high salary in her decorating business. She
said it was an opening that wouldn’t come again and she
had to take it, and anyway, as George was coming home
for a vacation, they wouldn’t be entirely alone. The night
she left she lay awake in her lower berth tremendously
happy in the roar of the air and the swift pound of the
wheels on the rails. But after St. Louis she began to worry:
>she’d decided she was pregnant.
    She was terribly frightened. The Grand Central Station
         ff8

566
seemed so immense, so full of blank faces staring at her’
as she passed following the redcap who carried her bag.
She was afraid she^d faint before she got to the taxicab.
All the way downtown the jolting of the cab and the
jangling throb of the tralEc in her ears made her head
swim with nausea. At the Brevoort she had some coffee.
Ruddy sunlight was coming in the tall windows, the place
had a warm restaurant smelly she began to feel better. She
went to the phone and called Eleanor. A French maid
answered that Mademoiselle was still asleep, but that
she would tell her who had called as soon as she woke
up. Then she called Freddy who sounded very much
excited and said he’d be there as soon as he could get over
from Brooklyn.
    When she saw Freddy it was just as if she hadn’t been
away at all. He almost had a backer for the Maya ballet
and he was mixed up in a new musical show he wanted
Eveline to do costumes for. But he was very gloomy about
the prospects of war with Germany, said he was a pacifist
and would probably have to go to jail, unless there was a
revolution. Eveline told him about her talks with Jose
O’Riely and what a great painter he was, and said she
thought maybe she was an anarchist. Freddy looked
worried and asked her if she was sure she hadn’t fallen
in love with him, and she blushed and smiled and said
no, and Freddy said she was a hundred times better look-
ing than last year.
    They went together to see Eleanor whose house in the
east thirties was very elegant and expensivelooking. Elea-
nor was sitting up in bed answering her mail. Her hair
was carefully done and she had on a pink satin dressing
gown with lace and ermine on it. They had coffee with her
and hot rolls that the Martinique maid had baked herself.
Eleanor was delighted to see Eveline and said how well
she looked and was full of mysteries about her business
and everything. She said she was on the edge of becoming

                                                                               129

567
   theatrical producer and spoke about “my financial ad-
viser” this and that, until Eveline didn’t know what to
            still it was evident that things were going pretty
think 5
well with her. Eveline wanted to ask her what she knew
about birthcontrol, but she never got around to it, and
perhaps it was just as well, as, when they got on the sub-
ject of the war they quarrelled at once.
    That afternoon Freddy took her to tea with him at
the house of a middleaged lady who lived on West 8th
Street and was an enthusiastic pacifist. The house was full
of people arguing and young men and young women
wagging their heads together in important whispers. There
she got to talking with a haggardlooking brighteyed young
man named Don Stevens. Freddy had to go off to a re-
hearsal and she stayed there talking to Don Stevens. Then
all of a sudden they found that everybody had gone and
that they were alone with the hostess, who was a stout
puffy eager woman that Eveline decided was just too tire-
some. She said Goodnight and left. She had hardly gotten
down the front steps to the street when Stevens was after
her with his lanky stride dragging his overcoat behind him;
‘WThere are you going to eat supper, Eveline Hutchins:”’
Eveline said she hadn’t thought and before she knew it
was eating with him in an Italian restaurant on 3rd Street.
He ate a lot of spaghetti very fast and drank a lot of red
wine and introduced her to the waiter, whose name was
Giovanni. “He’s a maximalist and so am I,” he said.
“This young woman seems to be a philosophic anarchist,
but we’ll get her over that.”
    Don Stevens came from South Dakota and had worked
on small town papers ever since his highschool days. He’d
also worked as a harvest hand back home and been in on
several I.W.W. scraps. He showed Eveline his red card
with considerable pride. He’d come to New York to work
on The Cdly but had just resigned because they were too
danan lilylivered, he said. He also wrote for the Metro-
         130

568
fohtan Magazine and the Masses^ and spoke at antiwar
meetings. He said that there wasn’t a Chinaman’s chance
that the U. S. would keep out of the warj the Germans
were winning, the working class all over Europe was on
the edge of revolt, the revolution in Russia was the begin-
ning of the worldwide social revolution and the bankers
                                             the only question was
knew it and Wilson knew it 3                                   whether
the industrial workers in the east and the farmers and
casual laborers in the middle west and west would stand
for war. The entire press was bought and muzzled. The
Morgans had to fight or go bankrupt. ^Tt’s the greatest
conspiracy in history.”
    Giovanni and Eveline listened holding their breath,
Giovanni occasionally looking nervously around the room
to see if any of the customers at the other tables looked
like detectives. “God damn it, Giovanni, let’s have an-
other bottle of wine,” Don would cry out in the middle of
a long analysis of Kuhn, Loeb and Company’s foreign
holdings. Then suddenly he’d turn to Eveline filling up
her glass, “Where have you been all these years? I’ve
so needed a lovely girl like you. Let’s have a splendid time
tonight, may be the last good meal we ever get, we may
be in jail or shot against a wall a month from now, isn’t
that so, Giovanni?”
    Giovanni forgot to wait on his other tables and was
bawled out by the proprietor. Eveline kept laughing.
When Don asked her why, she said she didn’t know ex-
cept that he was so funny.
    “But it really is Armageddon, God damn it.” Then he
shook his head: “What’s the use, there never was a
woman living who could understand political ideas.”
    “Of course I can ... I think it’s terrible. I don’t know
what to do.”
    “I don’t know what to do,” he said savagely, “I don’t
know whether to fight the war and go to jail, or to get a

 job as a war correspondent and see the goddam mess. If

                                                                               131

569
 j^ou could rely on anybody to back you up it ud be another

 thing .   . . Oh, hell, let’s get out of here.”
    He charged the cheque, and asked Eveline to lend him

half a dollar to leave for Giovanni, said he didn’t have a

cent in his jeans. She found herself drinking a last glass

of wine with him in a chilly littered room up three fl.ghts

of dirty wooden stairs in Patchin Place. He began to make
love to her and when she objected that she’d just known
 him for seven hours he said that was another stupid bour-
geois idea she ought to get rid of. When she asked him
about birthcontrol, he sat down beside her and talked for
half an hour about what a great woman Margaret Sanger
was and how birthcontrol was the greatest single blessing

to mankind since the invention of fire. When he started to
make love to her again in a businesslike way she laughing
and blushing let him take off her clothes. It was three
o’clock when feeling weak and guilty and bedraggled she
got back to her room at the Brevoort. She took a huge
dose of castor oil and went to bed where she lay awake
till daylight wondenng what she could say to Freddy,
She’d had a date to meet him at eleven for a bite of supper
after his rehearsal. Her fear of being pregnant had dis-
appeared, like waking up from a nightmare.
    That spring was full of plans fo*" shows and decorating
houses with Eleanor and Freddy, but nothing came of
them, and after a while Eveline couldn’t keep her mind on
New York, what with war declared, and the streets filling
with flags and uniforms, and everybody going patriotic
crazy around her and seeing spies and pacifists under
every bed. Eleanor was getting herself a job in the Red
Cross. Don Stevais had signed up with the Friends’
Relief. Freddy announced a new decision every day, but
finally said he wouldn’t decide what to do till he was called
for the draft. Adelaide’s husband had a job in Washington
in the new Shipping Board. Dad was writing her every
few i^ys, that Wilson was the greatest president since
        laa

570
Lincoln. Some days she felt that she must be losing het
mindj people around her seemed so cracked. When she
began talking about it to Eleanor, Eleanor smiled in a
superior way and said sheM already asked to have her
as assistant in her office in Paris.
    ^^Your office in Paris, darling?” Eleanor nodded.
don’t care what kind of work it is, Pll do it gladly,” said
Eveline. Eleanor sailed one Saturday on the Rochamhem^
and two weeks later Eveline herself sailed on the Touraine^
    It was a hazy summer evening. She’d been almost rude
cutting short the goodbys of Margaret and Adelaide and
Margaret’s husband Bill who was a Major by this time and
teaching sharpshooting out on Long Island, she was so
anxious to cut loose from this America she felt was just
too tiresome. The boat was two hours late in sailing. The
band kept playing Ttfferary and Aufres de ma Blonda
and La Madelon, There w^ere a great many young men
around in various uniforms, all rather drunk. The little
French sailors with their red pompons and baby faces
yelled back and forth in rolling twangy bordelais. Eveline
walked up and down the deck until her feet were tired.

It seemed as if the boat would never sail. And Freddy,
who had turned up late, kept waving to her from the
dock and she was afraid Don Stevens would come and she
was sick of all her life in these last years.
    She went down to her cabin and started reading Bar-
busse’s Le Feu that Don had sent her. She fell asleep,
and when the greyhaired skinny woman who was her
cabinmate woke her up bustling around, the first thing
 she felt was the trembling pound of the ship’s engines.
 ^Well, you missed dinner,” said the greyhaired woman.
    Her name was Miss Eliza Felton and she was an
 illustrator of children’s books. She was going to France

 to drive a truck. At first Eveline thought she was ju^ too
 tiresome, but as the warm quiet days of the crossiri^ wore
 on she got to hke her. Misa F4tc» had a gre^ crush on

571
Eveline and was a nuisance, but she was fond of wine and
tnew a great deal about France, where she’d lived for
many years. In fact she’d studied pinting at Fontaine-

bleau in the old days of the impressionists. She was bitter

against the Huns on account of Rheims and Louvain and
the poor little Belgian babies with their hands cut off, but
she didn’t have much use for any male government, called
Wilson a coward, Clemenceau a bully and Lloyd George a
sneak. She laughed at the precautions against submarine

attack and said she knew the French line was perfectly safe
because all the German spies travelled by it. When they
landed in Bordeaux she was a great help to Eveline.
   They stayed over a day to see the town instead of going
up to Paris with all the other Red Cross people and Re-

lief workers. The rows of grey eighteenth century houses
were too lovely in the endless rosy summer twilight, and
the flowers for sale and the polite people in the shops and
the delicate patterns of the ironwork, and the fine dinner
they had at the Chapon Fin.
   The only trouble with going around with Eliza Felton
was that she kept all the men away. They went up to Pans
on the day train next day and Eveline could hardly keep
from tears at the beauty of the country and the houses
and the vines and the tall ranks of poplars. There were
little soldiers in pale blue at every station and the elderly
and deferential conductor looked like a collegeprofessor.
When the train finally slid smoothly through the tunnel
and into the Orleans station her throat was so tight she
could hardly speak. It was as if she’d never been to Paris
before.
    “Now where are you going, dear? You see we have to
carry our own traps,” said Eliza Felton in a businesslike
way.
    “Well, I suppose I should go to the Red Cross and
ceport.”
    ‘TToo late foi tonight, I can tell you that.”

         134

572
    “WelJ, 1 might try lo call up Eleanor,”
    “Might as well try to wake the dead as try to use the
Paris telephone in wartime . . . what you’d better do,
dear is come mth me to a little hotel I know on the Quai
                                                                                    that’s
and sign up with the Red Cross in the morning j
what I’m going to do.”
    “I’d hate to get sent back home.”
    “They won’t know you’re here for weeks. ... I know
those dumbbells.”
    So Eveline waited with their traps while Eliza Felton
fetched a httle truck. They piled their bags on it and
rolled them out of the station and through the empty
streets in the last faint mauve of twilight to the hotel.
There were very few lights and they were blue and
hooded with tin hats so that they couldn’t be seen from
above. The Seine, the old bridges, and the long bulk of

                                                                            it was like
the Louvre opposite looked faint and unreal j
walking through a Whistler.
    “We must hurry and get something to eat before every-
thing closes up.   . . . I’ll take you to Adrienne’s,” said
Miss Felton.
    They left their bags to b6 taken up to their rooms at           ,
the hotel du Quai Voltaire and walked fast through a lot
of narrow crisscross fastdarkening streets. They ducked
into the door of the little restaurant just as some one was
starting to pull the heavy iron shutter down. ^‘Tiens, c’est
Mademoiselle Elise,” cried a woman’s voice from the back
of the heavily upholstered little room. A short French-
woman with a very large head and very large popeyes ran
forward and hugged Miss Felton and Bssed her a number
of times. “This is Miss Hutchins,” said Miss Felton in
her dry voice. “Verry plised . . . she is so prretty . . .

 beautiful eyes, hein?” It made Eveline imcomfortable the
way the woman looked at her, the way her big powdered
face was set like an egg in a cup in the frilly faighnecked

blouse. She brought out some soup and cold veal and

                                                                               135

573
 bread, with many apologies on account of not having butter

or sugar, complaimng in a singsong voice about how severe

the police were and how the profiteers were hoarding food
and how bad the military situation was. Then she suddenly
stopped talking, all their eyes lit at the same moment on
the sign on the wall;

      MEFIEZ VOUS LES OREILLES ENEMIES
                             VOUS ECOUTENT

    “Enfin c’est la guerre,” Adrienne said. She was sitting
beside Miss Felton, patting Miss Felton’s thin hand with
her pudgy hand all covered with paste rings. She had
made them coffee. They were drinking little glasses of
Cointreau. She leaned over and patted Eveline on the
neck. “Faut pas s’en faire, hem?” Then she threw back
her head and let out a shrill hysterical laugh. She kept
pouring out more little glasses of Cointreau and Miss
Felton seemed to be getting a little tipsy. Adrienne kept
patting her hand. Eveline felt her own head swimming
in the stuffy dark closedup little room. She got to her feet
and said she was going back to the hotel, that she had a
headache and was sleepy. They tried to coax her to stay
but she ducked out under the shutter.
    Half the street outside was lit up by moonlight, the
other half was in pitchblack shadow. All at once Eveline
remembered that she didn’t know the way back to the
hotel, still she couldn’t go into that restaurant again and
that woman gave her the horrors, so she walked along fast,
keeping in the moonlight, scared of the silence and the few
shadowy people and the old gaunt houses with their wide
inky doorways. She came out on a boulevard at last where
there were men and women strolling, voices and an occa-
rional automobilte with blue lights running silently over
the asphalt. Suddenly the nightmare scream of a siren
started up in the distance, then another and another. Some-
where lost in the ^ Was a faint hiujaming like a bee,
        £36

574
louder then fainter, then louder again. Eveline looked at
the people around her. Nobody seemed alarmed or to
hurry their strolling pace.
    ^^Les avions . . , les boches . .          she heard people
saying in unstartled tones. She found herself standing at
the curb staring up into the milky sky that was fast be-
coming rayed with searchlights. Next to her was a fatherly-
looking French officer with all kinds of lace on his kepi
and drooping moustaches. The sky overhead began to
sparkle like with mica* it was beautiful and far away like
fireworks seen across the lake on the Fourth. Involuntarily
she said aloud, ^What^s that?” ^^Cest le shrapnel,
mademoiselle. It is ourr ahnt-aircrahft cannons,” he said
carefully in English, and then gave her his arm and
offered to take her home. She noticed that he smelt rather
strongly of cognac but he was very nice and paternal in
his manner and made funny gestures of things coming
down on their heads and said they must get under cover.
She said please to go to the hotel du Quai Voltaire as she^d
lost her way.
    ^^Ah charmant, charmant,” said the elderly French
officer. While they had stood there talking everybody else
on the street had melted out of sight. Guns were barking
in every direction now. They were going down through the
narrow streets again, keeping close to the wall. Once he
pulled her suddenly into a doorway and something landed
whang on the pavement opposite. ^Tt is the fragments of
 shrapnel, not good,” he s^d, tapping himself on the top
 of the kepi. He laughed and Eveline laughed and they
 got along famously. They had come out on the riverbank.
 It seemed safe for some reason under the thickfoliaged

 trees. From the door of the hotel he suddenly pointed into
 the sky, ^^Look, c^est les fokkers, ils s^en fichent de nous..”
 As he spoke the Boche planes wheeled overhead so that

 their wings caught the moonlight. For a second they were
 like seven tiny silver dragonflies, then they’d vanished.

                                                                               E37

575
At the same moment came the rending snort of a bonib

from somewhere across the river. ^^Permettez, mademoi-

selle.^^ They went into the pitchblack hall of the hotel

and felt their way down into the cellar. As he handed
Eveline down the last step of the dusty wooden stairs the

officer gravely saluted the mixed group of people in bath-

robes or overcoats over their nightclothes who were
grouped around a couple of candles. There was a waiter

there and the officer tried to order a drink, but the waiter

said, ^^Ah, mon colonel, s^est defendu,” and the colonel
made a wry face. Eveline sat up on a sort of table. She
was so excited looking at the people and listening to the

distant snort of the bombs that she hardly noticed that
colonel was squeezing her knee a little more than was
necessary. The colonePs hands became a problem. When
the airraid was over something went by on the street mak-
ing a funny seesaw noise between the quacking of a duck
and a burrows bray. It struck Eveline so funny she laughed
and laughed so that the colonel didn’t seem to know what
to make of her. When she tried to say goodnight to him to
go up to her room and get some sleep, he wanted to go up
too. She didn’t know what to do. He’d been so nice and
polite she didn’t want to be rude to him, but she couldn’t
seem to make him understand that she wanted to go to
bed and to sleeps he’d answer that so did he. When she
tried to explain that she had a friend with her, he asked
if the friend was as charming as mademoiselle, in that case
he’d be delighted. Eveline’s French broke down entirely.
She wished to heavens Miss Felton would turn up, she
couldn’t make the concierge understand that she wanted
the key to her room and that mon colonel wasn’t coming
up and was ready to break down and cry when a young
American in civilian clothes with a red face and a turned-
up nose appeared from somewhere out of the shadows and
 said with a flourish in very bad French, ^^Monsleur, moi
 Frere de naadmosel, can’t you see that the^ little girl is

         138

576
fatiguee and wants to say bon-soir?” He linked his arm iii
the colonePs and said, ^^Vive la France. . . , Come up to
my room and have a drink.” The colonel drew himself up
and looked very angry. Without waiting to see what hap-
pened Eveline ran up the stairs to her room, rushed in and
doublelocked the door.



                                                    NEWSREEL XXIV


         it is difBcult to realize the colossal scale upon which Eu-
rope will ha-ve to borrow m order to make good the destruc*
tion of war

                  BAGS 28 HUNS SINGLEHANDED

         Peace Talk Beginning To Have Its Effect On Southern
Iron Market
            LOCAL BOY CAPTURES OFFICER

          ONE THIRD WAR ALLOTMENTS FRAUDULENT

                       There are smiles that make us haffy
                       There are smtles that make us blue

          again let us examine into the matter of rates, let it be
 assumed that the United States is operating fleets aggregating
 3000 freight and passenger vessels between U.S, and foreign

 ports
            GANG LEADER SLAIN IN STREET

               There are smiles that wife away the teardrofs
              Like the sunbeams dry away the dew
               There are smiles that have a tender meaning
               That the eyes of love alone can see

             SOLDIER VOTE CARRIED ELECTION

          suppose now that into this delicate medium of economic
  law there is thrust the controlling factor of an owner of a

                                                                                         139

577
third of the world’s tonnage, who regards with equanimity

both profit and loss, who does not count as a factor in the cost

of operation the interest on capital investment, who builds

vessels whether they may be profitably operated or not an

who charges rates commensurate in no certain measure with

the laws of supply and demand, how long would it be before

the ocean transport of the whole world had broken down

completely ?

              CROWN PRINCE ON THE RUN

             But the srmles that fill my heart with sunshine
                                             Are
                                                   the
                                                        smiles
                                                                  you
                                                                        give
                                                                                to
                                                                                   me

        persistent talk of peace is an unsettling factor and the

epidemic of influenza has deterred country buyers from visiting

the larger centers



                                 THE CAMERA EYE (32)


         a quatorze heures precisement the Boche diurnally

 shelled that bridge with their wellknown precision as to

 time and place a quatorze heures precisement Dick Nor-

 ton with his monocle in his eye lined up his section at a

 little distance from the bridge to turn it over to the Amer-

 ican Red Cross

          the Red Cross majors looked pudgy and white under

  thar new uniforms in theif shined Sam Browne belts in

           140

578
their shined tight leather puttees         so this was overseas

      so this was the front       well well

       Dick Norton adjusted his monocle and began to talk

about how as gentlemen volunteers he had signed us up

and as gentlemen volunteers he bade us farewell Wham

the first arrive the smell of almonds the Sunday feeling o£

no traffic on the road not a poilu in sight Dick Norton

adjusted his monocle        the Red Cross majors felt the

showering mud           sniffed the lyddite swift whiff of

latrines and of huddled troops
        Wham Wham Wham like the Fourth of July the

shellfragments sing our ears ring

        the bridge is standing and Dick Norton adjusting his

monocle is standing talking at length about gentlemen

volunteers and ambulance service and la belle France


        The empty staffcar is standing

        but where are the majors taking over command

        who were to make a speech in the name of the Red

Cross? The slowest and pudgiest and whitest of the

majors is still to be seen on his hands and knees with mud

all over his puttees crawling into the abris and that’s th<

last we saw of the Red Cross Majors

        and the last we heard of gentlemen

        or volunteers

579
                               THE HAPPY WARRIOR


         The Roosevelts had lived for seven righteous gen-
                                                     they owned a big brick
 erations on Manhattan Island 5
house on 20th Street, an estate up at Dobbs Ferry, lots
in the city, a pew in the Dutch Reformed Church, inter-
ests, stocks and bonds, they felt Manhattan was theirs,
they felt America was theirs. Their son,
         Theodore,
         was a sickly youngster, suffered from asthma, was
                                his hands and feet were so small it
very nearsighted 5
was hard for him to learn to boxj his arms were very
short j
        his father was something of a humanitarian, gave
Christmas dinners to newsboys, deplored conditions,
slums, the East Side, Hell’s Kitchen.
        Young Theodore had ponies, was encouraged to
walk in the woods, to go camping, was instructed in
boxing and fencing (an American gentleman should
know how to defend himself) taught Bible Class, did
mission work (an American gentleman should do his
best to uplift those not so fortunately situated) 5
        righteousness was his by birth j
        he had a passion for nature study, for reading
                                                                                        he
about birds and wild animals, for going hunting 3
got to be a good shot in spite of his glasses, a good
walker in spite of his tiny feet and short legs, a fair
horseman, an aggressive scrapper in spite of his short
reach, a crack politician in spite of being the son of one
of the owning Dutch families of New York.
        In 1876 he went up to Cambridge to study at
Harvard, a wealthy talkative erratic young man with
sidewhiskers and definite ideas about                   * everything under
the sun,
        at Harvard he drove around in a dogcart, collected
        142

580
stuflfed birds, mounted specimens he’d shot on his trips
in the Adirondacksj in spite of not drinking and being
somewhat of a christer, having odd ideas about reform
and remedying abuses, he made Porcellian and the
Dickey and the clubs that were his right as the son of
one of the owning Dutch families of New York,
        He told his friends he was going to devote his life
to social service: 7 wish to 'preach not the doctrine of
ignoble ease^ but the doctrine of the strenuous Hfe^ the
life of toil and effort^ of labor and strife.

        From the time he was eleven years old he wrote
copiously, filled diaries, notebooks, loose leaves with a
big impulsive scrawl about everything he did and
thought and said;
         naturally he studied law.
         He married young and went to Switzerland to
climb the Matterhorn; his first wife’s early death broke
him all up. He went out to the badlands of western
Dakota to become a rancher on the Little Missouri
River;
         when he came back to Manhattan he was Teddy,
the straight shooter from the west, the elkhunter, the
 man in the Stetson hat, who’d roped steers, fought a
 grizzly hand to hand, acted as Deputy Sheriff,
          (a Roosevelt has a duty to his country; the duty ol
a Roosevelt is to uplift those not so fortunately situated,
 those who have come more recently to our shores)
         in the west, Deputy Sheriff Roosevelt felt the
white man’s burden, helped to arrest malefactors, bad
 men; service was bully.
         All this time he’d been writing, filling the maga-
 zines with stories of his hunts and adventures, filling

 political meetings with his opinions, his denunciations,
 his pat phrases: Strenuous Life, Realizable Ideals, Just
 Government, when men fear work or fear righteous

                                                                               143

581
 vosTy vohen voofnen f&sf moth&fhood, they tyemble on

the brink of doom, and well it is that they should vaai.ish

from the earth, where they are fit subjects for the scorn

of all men and women who are themselves strong and
brave and highminded.
        T.R. married a wealthy woman and righteously
raised a family at Sagamore Hill.
        He served a term in the New York Legislature,
was appointed by Grover Cleveland to the unremunera-
tive job of Commissioner for Civil Service Reform,
        was Reform Police Commissioner of New York,
pursued malefactors, stoutly maintained that white was
white and black was black,
        wrote the Naval History of the War of 1812,
        was appointed Assistant Secretary of the Navy,
        and when the Maine blew up resigned to lead the
Rough Riders,
        Lieutenant-Colonel.
        This was the Rubicon, the Fight, the Old Glory,
the Just Cause. The American public was not kept in
ignorance of the Colonel’s bravery when the bullets
sang, how he charged without his men up San Juan
Hill and had to go back to fetch them, how he shot a
running Spaniard in the tail.
        It was too bad that the regulars had gotten up
San Juan Hill first from the other side, that there was
no need to get up San Juan Hill at all. Santiago was
surrendered. It was a successful campaign. T.R.
charged up San Juan Hill into the governorship of the
Empire State 5
        but after the fighting, volunteers warcorrespond-
ents magazinewriters began to want to go home;

 .      it wasn’t bully huddling under puptents in the
tropical rain or scorching in the morning sun of the
seared Cuban hills with malaria mowing them down
and dysentery and always yellowjack to be afraid of.
        L44

582
        T.R. got up a round robin to the President and
asked for the amateur warriors to be sent home and
leave the dirtywork to the regulars
        who^ were digging trenches and shovelling crap
and fighting malaria and dysentery and yellowjack
        to make Cuba cosy for the Sugar Trust
        and the National City Bank.

        When he landed at home, one of his first inter-
views was with Lemuel Quigg, emissary of Boss Platt
who had the votes of upstate New York sewed into the
lining of his vestj
        he saw Boss Platt too, but he forgot about that
afterwards. Things were bully. He wrote a life of
Oliver Cromwell whom people said he resembled. As
Governor he doublecrossed the Platt machine (a
                                                                           Boss Platt
righteous man may have a short memory) ;
thought he’d shelved him by nominating him for the
Vice-Presidency in 190O}

        Czolgocz made him president.

        T.R. drove like a fiend in a buckboard over the
muddy roads through the driving rain from Mt. Marcy
in the Adirondacks to catch the train to Buffalo where
McKinley was dying.
         As President
         he moved Sagamore Hill, the healthy happy
normal American home, to the White House, took
foreign diplomats and fat armyofficers out walking in
Rock Creek Park where he led them a terrible dance
through brambles, bopping across the creek on stepping-
stones, wading the fords, scrambling up the shaly banks,
         and shook the Big Stick at malefactors of great
wealth.


                                                                               145

583
         Things were bully.
         He engineered the Panama revolution under the
shadow of which took place the famous hocuspocus of
juggling the old and new canal companies by which
forty million dollars vanished into the pockets of the
international bankers,
        but Old Glory floated over the Canal Zone
        and the canal was cut through.
        He busted a few trusts,
        had Booker Washington to lunch at the White
House,
        and urged the conservation of wild life.
        He got the Nobel Peace Prize for patching up the
Peace of Portsmouth that ended the Russo-Japanese
war,
        and sent the Atlantic Fleet around the world for
everybody to see that America was a firstclass power.
He left the presidency to Taft after his second term
leaving to that elephantine lawyer the congenial task of
pouring judicial oil on the hurt feelings of the money-
masters
        and went to Africa to hunt big game.
        Big game hunting was bully.
        Every time a lion or an elephant went crashing
down into the jungle underbrush, under the impact of
a wellplaced mushroom bullet
        the papers lit up with headlines}
        when he talked with the Kaiser on horseback
        the world was not ignorant of what he said, or
when he lectured the Nationalists at Cairo telling them
that this was a white man’s world.
        He went to Brazil where he travelled through the
Matto Grosso in a dugout over waters infested with the
tiny maneating fish, the piranha,
        shot tapirs,
        jaguars,

         146 ,

584
        specimens of the whitelipped peccary.
        He ran the rapids of the River of Doubt
        down to the Amazon frontiers where he arrived
sick, an infected abscess in his leg, stretched out under
an awning in a dugout with a tame trumpeterbird beside
him.

         Back in the States he fought his last fight when
he came out for the republican nomination in 1912 a
progressive, champion of the Square Deal, crusader for
                                  the Bull Moose bolted out from
the Plain People j
under the Taft steamroller and formed the Progressive
Party for righteousness’ sake at the Chicago Colosseum
while the delegates who were going to restore demo-

cratic government rocked with tears in their eyes as

 they sang

                  On       ward, Christian so old gers
                  March        ing as to war

          Perhaps the River of Doubt had been too much for

 a man of his agej perhaps things weren’t so bully any

 more, T.R. lost his voice during the triangular carn-

 paign. In Duluth a maniac shot him in the chest, his

 life was saved only by the thick bundle of manuscript

 of the speech he was going to deliver. T.R. delivered

 the speech with the bullet still in him, heard the scared

  applause, felt the plain people praying for his recov-

  ery but the spell was broken somehow.
          The Democrats swept in, the world war drowned

  out the righteous voice of the Happy Warrior in the

  roar of exploding lyddite.
           Wilson wouldn’t let T.R. lead a division, this was

  no amateur’s war (perhaps the regulars remembered

  the round robin at Santiago). All he could do was

   write magazine articles aeainst the Huns, send his sonsj

   Quentin was killed
                                                                                  147

585
          It wasn’t the bully amateur’s world any more.
  Nobody knew that on armistice day, Theodore Roose-
  velt, happy amateur warrior with the grinning teeth,
  the shaking forefinger, naturalist, explorer, magazine-
  writer, Sundayschool teacher, cowpuncher, moralist,
 politician, righteous orator with a short memory, fond
 of denouncing liars (the Ananias Club) and having
 pillowfights with his children, was taken to the Roose-
  velt hospital gravely ill with inflammatory rheumatism.
          Things weren’t bully any morej
          T.R. had gritj
         he bore the pain, the obscurity, the sense of being
 forgotten as he had borne the gnlling portages when he
 was exploring the River of Doubt, the heat, the fetid
 jungle mud, the infected abscess in his leg,
         and died quietly in his sleep
         at Sagamore Hill
         on January 6, 1919
         and left on the shoulders of his sons
         the white man’s burden.



                            THE CAMERA EYE (33)


        11,000 registered harlots said the Red Cross Pub-

licity Man infest the streets of Marseilles

       the Ford stalled three times in the Rue de Rivoli

in Fontainebleau we had our cafe au lait in bed    the For-
est was so achingly red yellow novemberbrown under the
tiny lavender rain         beyond the road climbed through
dovecolored hills      the air smelt of apples
       Nevers (Dumas nom de dieu) Athos Pcrthos and
        148

586
d’Artagnan had ordered a bisque at the inn we wound
down slowly into red Macon that smelt of winelees and

the vintage        fais ce que voudras        saute Bourgignon

in the Rhone valley the first strawcolored sunlight streaked

the white road with shadows of skeleton poplars             at

every stop we drank wine strong as beefsteaks rich as the

palace of Frangols Premier bouquet of the last sleet-

lashed roses we didn’t cross the river to Lyon where

Jean-Jacques suffered from greensickness as a young-

ster      the landscapes of Provence were all out of the Gal-

lic Wars the towns were dictionaries of latin roots Orange

Tarascon Arles where Van Gogh cut off his ears          the

convoy became less of a conducted tour we stopped to

play craps in the estaminets boys we’re going south       to

drink the red wine the popes loved best              to eat fat

meals in oliveoil and garlic bound south             cepes pro-

vengale the north wind was shrilling over the plains of

the Camargue hustling us into Marseilles where the eleven

thousand were dandling themselves in the fogged mirrors

of the promenoir at the Apollo

       oysters and vin de Cassis petite fille tellement brune

tete de lune qui amait les veentair sports           in the end

they were all slot machines undressed as Phocean figurines'

posted with their legs apart around the scummy edges of

the oldest port

       the Riviera was a letdown but there was a candycol-

ored church with a pointed steeple on every hill beyond

                                                                              149

587
San Remo        Porto Maurizio blue seltzerbottles stand-

ing in the cinzanocolored sunlight beside a glass of VER-
MOUTH TORINO             Savona was set for the Merchant

of Venice painted by Veronese Ponte Decimo      in Ponte

Decimo ambulances were parked In a moonlit square of

bleak stone workingpeople^s houses     hoarfrost covered

everything        in the little bar the Successful Story Writer

taught us to drink cognac and maraschino half and half

       havanuzzerone

       it turned out he was not writing what he felt he

wanted to be writing What can you tell them at home

about the war? it turned out he was not wanting what he

wrote he wanted to be feeling              cognac and mara-

schino was no longer young           (It made us damn sore

we greedy for what we felt we wanted tell ’em all they

lied see new towns go to Genoa)     havanuzzerone?      It

turned out that he wished he was a naked brown shep-

herd boy sitting on a hillside playing a flute in the sunlight

       going to Genoa was easy enough the streetcar went

there Genoa the new town we’d never seen full of marble

doges and breakneck stairs marble lions in the moon-

light        Genoa       was the ancient ducal city burning?

all the marble palaces and the square stone houses and the

campaniles topping hills had one marble wall on fire

       bonfire under the moon

       the bars were full of Britishers overdressed civilians

strolling under porticoes outside the harbor under the

        150

588
Genoa moon the sea was on fire the member of Hts

Majesty’s Intelligence Service said it was a Yankee tanker

had struck a mine? been torpedoed? why don’t they scut-

tle her?

       Genoa       eyes flared with the light of the burning

tanker Genoa what are you looking for? the flare

in the blood under the moon down the midnight streets

in boys’ and girls’ faces Genoa            eyes the question in

their eyes

       through the crumbling stone courts under the Genoa
moon up and down the breakneck stairs eyes on fire under

the moon round the next corner full in your face the flare

of the bonfire on the sea

        I ijOOO registered harlots said the Red Cross Publicity

Man infest the streets of Marseilles




                                                      JOE WILLIAMS


    It was a lousy trip. Joe was worried all the time about
Del and about not making good and the deckcrew was a
bunch of soreheads. The engines kept breaking down. The.
Higginbotham was built like a cheesebox and so slow there
were days when they didn’t make more’n thirty or forty
miles against moderate head winds. The only good times
he had was taking boxing lessons from the second en-
gineer, a fellow named Glen Hardwick. He was a little
wiry guy, who was a pretty good amateur boxer, though
he must have been forty years old. By the time they

                                                                               151

589
got to Bordeaux Joe was able to give him a good workout
He was heavier and had a better reach and Glen said he^d
a straight natural right that would take him far as a
lightweight.
    In Bordeaux the first port official that came on board
tried to kiss Cap’n Perry on both cheeks. President Wilson
had just declared war on Germany. All over the town
nothing was too good for Les Amencains. Evenings when
they were off Joe and Glen Hardwick cruised around to-
gether. The Bordeaux girls were damn pretty. They met
up with a couple one afternoon dn the public garden that
weren’t hookers at all. They were nicely dressed and
looked like they came of good familieSj what the hell it
was wartime. At first Joe thought he ought to lay off that
stuff now that he was married, but hell, hadn’t Del held
out on him. What did she think he was, a plaster saint
They ended by going to a little hotel the girls knew and
eating supper and drinking beaucoup wine and champagne
and having a big party. Joe had never had such a good
time with a girl in his life. His girl’s name was Marceline
and when they woke up in the morning the help at the
hotel brought them in coffee and rolls and they ate break-
fast, both of ’em sitting up in bed and Joe’s French began
to pick up and he learned how to say C’est la guerre and
On les aura and Je m’en fiche and Marceline said she’d
always be his sweetie when he was in Bordeaux and called
him petit lapm.
    They only stayed in Bordeaux the four days it took ’em
to wait their turn to go up to the dock and unload, but
they drank wine and cognac all the time and the food was
swell and nobody could do enough for them on account
of America having come into the war and it was a great
old four days.
    On the trip home the Higginbotham sprung leaks so
bad the old man stopped worrying about submarines al-
together. It was nip and tuck if they’d make Halifax.
         152

590
U he ship was light and rolled like a log so that even with
fiddles on they couldn’t keep dishes on the messtable. One
dirty night of driving fog somewhere south of Cape Race,
Joe with his chin in his peajacket was taking a turn on the
deck amidship when he was suddenly thrown flat. They
never knew what hit ’em, a mine or a torpedo. It wab
only that the boats were in darn good order and the sea
was smooth that they got off at all. As it was the four
boats got separated. The Higginbotham faded into the
fog and they never saw her sink, though the last they
could make out her maindeck was awash.
   They were cold and wet. In Joe’s boat nobody said
much. The men at the oars had to work hard to keep her
bow into the little chop that came up. Each sea a little
bigger than the others drenched them with spray. They
had on wool sweaters and lifepreservers but the cold
seeped through. At last the fog greyed a little and it was
day. Joe’s boat and the captain’s boat managed to keep to-
gether until late that afternoon they were picked up by a
big fishing schooner, a banker bound for Boston.
    When they were picked up old Cap’n Perry was in a
bad way. The master of the fishing schooner did every-*
thing he could for him, but he was unconscious when
they reached Boston four days later and died on the way
to the hospital. The doctors said it was pneumonia.
    Next morning Joe and the mate went to the office of the
agent of Perkins and Ellerman, the owners, to see about
getting themselves and the crew paid off. There was some
kind of damn monkeydoodle business about the vessel’s
having changed owners in midAtlantic, a man named
Rosenberg had bought her on a speculation and now he
couldn’t be found and the Chase National Bank was
claiming ownership and the underwriters were raising
cain. The agent said he was sure they’d be paid ail rightj
because Rosenberg had posted bond, but it would be some
time. “And what the hell do they expect us to do all that

                                                                               153

591
time, eat grass?” The clerk said he was sorry but they’d
have to take it up direct with Mr, Rosenberg.
   Joe and the first mate stood side by side on the curb
jutside the ojffice and cursed for a while, then the mate
went over to South Boston to break the news to the chief
who lived there.
   It was a warm June afternoon. Joe started to go aroimd
the shipping offices to see what he could do in the way of
a berth. He got tired of that and went and sat on a
bench on the Common, staring at the sparrows and the
gobs loafing around and the shop girls coming home from
work, their little heels clattering on the asphalt paths,
   Joe hung around Boston broke for a couple of weeks.
The Salvation Army took care of the survivors, serving
’em beans and watery soup and a lot of hymns off key
that didn’t appeal to Joe the way he felt just then. He
was crazy to get enough jack to go to Norfolk to see Del.
He wrote her every day but the letters he got back to
General Delivery seemed kinder cool. She was worried
about the rent and wanted some spring clothes and was
afraid they wouldn’t like it at the office if they found out
about her being married.
    Joe sat on the benches on the Common and roamed
around among the flowerbeds in the Public Garden, and
called regularly at the agent’s office to ask about a berth,
but finally he got sick of hanging around and went down
and signed on as quartermaster, on a United Fruit boat,
the Callao. He thought it ud be a short run and by the
time he got back in a couple of weeks he’d be able to get
his money.
    On the home trip they had to wait several days an-
chored outside in the roads at Roseau in Dominica, for
the limes they were going to load to be crated. Every-
body was sore at the port authorities, a lot of damn Brit-
ish niggers, on account of the quarantine and the limes
not being ready and how slow the lighters were coming
         154

592
off from the shore. The last night in port Joe and Larry,
one of the other quartermasters, got kidding some young
coons in a bumboat that had been selling fruit and liquor
                                               first thing they knew theyM
to the crew under the stern 3
offered ^em a dollar each to take ’em ashore and land ’em
down the beach so’s the officers wouldn’t see them. The
town smelt of niggers. There were no lights in the streets-
A little coalblack youngster ran up and asked did they
want some mountain chicken.        guess that means wild
women, sure,” said Joe. ^^All bets are off tonight.” The
little dinge took ’em into a bar kept by a stout mulatto
woman and said something to her in the island lingo they
couldn’t understand, and she said they’d have to wait a
few minutes and they sat down and had a couple of drinks^
of corn and oil.         guess she must be the madam,” said
Larry. ^Tf they ain’t pretty good lookers they can go to
hell for all I care. I’m not much on the dark meat.” From
out back came a sound of sizzling and a smell of some-
thing frying. ^^Dod gast it, I could eat something,” said
Joe. ^^Say, boy, tell her we want something to eat.” ^^By
and by you eat mountain chicken.” “What the helF”
They finished their drinks just as the woman came back
with a big platter of something fried up. “What’s that?”
                                                                            that’s how
asked Joe. “That’s mountain chicken, mister 3
we call froglegs down here but they ain’t like the frogs
you all has in the states. I been in the states and I know.
We wouldn’t eat them here. These here is clean frogs
just hke chicken. You’ll find it real good if you eat it.’*
They roared. “Jesus, the drinks are on us,” said Larry,
wiping the tears out of his eyes.
    Then they thought they’d go pick up some girls. They
 saw a couple leaving the house where the music was and
 followed ’em down the dark street. They started to talk

 to ’em and the girls showed their teeth and wriggled in

 their clothes and giggled. But three or four nigger me3>
 came up sore as hell and began talking in the local lingo^

                                                                               155

593
^^JeZj Larry, we’d better watch our step,” said Joe through
 his teeth. “Those bozos got razors.” They were in the
 middle o£ a yelling bunch of big black men when they
heard an American voice behind them, “Don’t say an-
other word, boys. I’ll handle this.” A small man in khaki
riding breeches and a panama hat was pushing his way
through the crowd talking in the island lingo all the time.
He was a little man with a gray triangular face tufted
with a goatee. “My name’s Henderson, DeBuque Hen-
derson of Bridgeport, Connecticut.” He shook hands with
both of them.
    “Well, what’s the trouble, boys? It’s all right now,
everybody knows me here. You have to be careful on
this island, boys, they’re touchy, these people, very
touchy. ... You boys better come along with me and
have a drink. . . .” He took them each by the arm and
walked them hurriedly up the street. “Well, I was young
once .  . . I’m still young . . . sure, had to see the
island . . . damn right too, the most interesting island in
the whole Caribbean only lonely . . . never see a white
face.”
    When they got to his house he walked them through a
big whitewashed room onto a terrace that smelt of vanilla
flowers. They could see the town underneath with its few
lights, the dark hills, the white hull of the Callao with the
lighters around her lit up by the working lights. At in-
tervals the rattle of winches came up to them and a crazy
jigtune from somewhere.
   The old feller poured them each a glass of rumj then
another. He had a parrot on a perch that kept screeching.
The landbreeze had come up full of heavy flowersmells
off the mountains and blew the old feller’s stringy white
hair in his eyes. He pointed at the Callao all lit up with its
ring of lighters. “United Fruit . . . United Thieves
Company . . . it’s a monopoly ... if you won’t take
their prices they let your limes rot on the wharf; it’s a
        156

594
monopoly. You boys are working for a bunch of thievetij
but I know it ain^t your fault. Here’s lookin’ at you.”
   Before they knew it Larry and Joe were singing. The
old man was talking about cotton spinning machinery and
canecrushers and pouring out drinks from a rumbottle.
They were pretty goddam drunk. They didn’t know how
they got aboard. Joe remembered the dark focastle and
the sound of snoring from the bunks spinning around,
then sleep hitting him like a sandbag and the sweet, sicky
taste of rum in his mouth.
   A couple of days later Joe came down with a fever
and horrible pains in his joints. He was out of his head
when they put him ashore at St. Thomas’s. It was dengue
and he was sick for two months before he had the strength
even to write Del to tell her where he was. The hos-
pital orderly told him he’d been out of his head five days
and they’d given him up for a goner. The doctors had
been sore as hell about it because this was post hospital^
after all he was a white man and unconscious and they
couldn’t very well feed him to the sharks.
    It was July before Joe was well enough to walk around
the steep little coraldust streets of the town. He had to
leave the hospital and would hav j been in a bad way if one
of the cooks at the marine barracks hadn’t looked out for
him and found him a flop in an unused section of the
building. It was hot and there was never a cloud in the
sky and he got pretty sick of looking at the niggers and
the bare hills and the blue shutin harbor. He spent a lot
of time sitting out on the old coalwharf in the shade of a
piece of corrugated iron roof looking through the plank-
ing at the clear deep bluegreen water, watching shoals of
snappers feeding around the piles. He got to thinking
about Del and that French girl in Bordeaux and the war
and how the United Fruit was a bunch of thieves and then
the thoughts would go roxind and round in his head like
the little silver and blue and yellow fish round the swaying

                                                                              157

595
 weeds on the piles and he^d find he’d dropped off to
i:leep.
    When a northbound fruitsteamer came into the harbor
he got hold o£ one of the officers on the wharf and told
him his sad story. They gave him passage up to New
York. First thing he did was try to get hold of Janey^
maybe if she thought he ought to, he’d give up this dog’s
life and take a steady job ashore. He called up the J.
Ward Moorehouse advertising office where she worked
but the girl at the other end of the line told him she was
the boss’s secretary and was out west on business.
    He went over and got a flop at Mrs. Olsen’s in Red-
hook. Everybody over there was talking about the draft
and how they rounded you up for a slacker if they picked
you up on the street without a registration card. And sure
enough, just as Joe was stepping out of the subway at
Wall Street one morning a cop came up to him and asked
him for his card. Joe said he was a merchant seaman and
had just got back from a trip and hadn’t had time to regis-
ter yet and that he was exempt, but the cop said he’d have
to tell that to the judge. They were quite a bunch being
                                             smart guys in the crowd
marched down Broadway 3                                             of
clerks and counterjumpers along the sidewalks yelled
^^Slackers” at them and the girls hissed and booed.
    In the Custom House they were herded into some of
the basement rooms. It was a hot August day. Joe elbowed
his way through the sweating, grumbling crowd towards
the window. Most of them were foreigners, there were
longshoremen and waterfront loafers^ a lot of the group
were talking big but Joe remembered the navy and kept
his mouth shut and listened. He was in there all day. The
cops wouldn’t let anybody telephone and there was only
one toilet and they had to go to that under guard. Joe
felt pretty weak on his pins, he hadn’t gotten over the
effect of that dengue yet. He was about ready to pass out

        158

596
when he saw a face he knew. Damned if it wasn^t Glen
Hardwick.
   Glen had been picked up by a Britisher and taken into
Halifax. He’d signed as second on the Chetmngy taking
out mules to Bordeaux and a general cargo to Genoa, going
to be armed with a threeinch gun and navy gunners, Joe
ought to come along. Jesus, do you think I coulci get
aboard her?’’ Joe asked. ^^Sure, they’re crazy for naviga-
                      they’d take you on even
tion officers 5                                          without a ticket.”
Bordeaux soxinded pretty good, remember the girlfriends
there They doped out that when Glen got out he’d phone
Mrs. Olsen to bring over Joe’s license that was in a cigar-
box at the head of his bed. When they finally were taken
up to the desk to be questioned the guy let Glen go right
away and said Joe could go as soon as they got his license
over but that they must register at once even if they were
exempt from the draft. “After all, you boys ought to re-
member that there’s a war on,” said the inspector at the
desk. “Well, we sure ought to know,” said Joe.
    Mrs. Olsen came over all m a flurry with Joe’s papers
and Joe hustled over to the office in East New York and
they took him on as bosun. The skipper was Ben Tarbell
who’d been first mate on the Higginbotham. Joe wanted
to go down to Norfolk to see Del, but hell this was no
time to stay ashore. What he did was to send her fifty
bucks he borrowed from Glen. He didn’t have time to
worry about it anyway because they sailed the next day
with sealed orders as to where to meet the convoy.
    It wasn’t so bad steaming in convoy. The myy officers
on the destroyers and the Salem that was in command
gave the orders, but the merchant captains kidded back
and forth with wigwag signals. It was some sight to see
the Atlantic Ocean full of long strings of freighters all
blotched up with gray and white watermarkings like bar-
berpoles by the camouflage artists. There were old tubs
in that convoy that a man wouldn’t have trusted himself

                                                                              159

597
}n to cross to Staten Island in peacetime and one of the
new wooden Shipping Board boats leaked so bad, jerry-

built out of new wood—somebody musta been making
money—that she had to be abandoned and scuttled half
way across.
    Joe and Glen smoked their pipes together in Glenns

cabin and chewed the fat a good deal. They decided that
everything ashore was the bunk and the only place for
them was blue water. Joe got damn fed up with bawling
out the bunch of scum he had for a crew. Once they got
in the zone, all the ships started steering a zigzag course
and everybody began to get white around the gills. Joe
never cussed so much in his life. There was a false alarm
of submarines every few hours and seaplanes dropping
depth bombs and excited gun crews firing at old barrels,
bunches of seaweed, dazzle in the water. Steaming into
the Gironde at night with the searchlights crisscrossing
and the blinker signals and the patrolboats scooting
around, they sure felt good.
    It was a relief to get the dirty trampling mules off the
ship and their stench out of everything, and to get rid of
the yelling and cussing of the hostlers. Glen and Joe only
got ashore for a few hours and couldn^t find Marceline
and Loulou. The Garonne was beginning to look like the
Delaware with all the new Americanbuilt steel and con-
crete piers. Going out they had to anchor several hours to
repair a leaky steampipe and saw a patrol boat go by tow-
ing five ships’ boats crowded to the gunnels, so they
guessed the fntzes must be pretty busy outside.
    No convoy this time. They slipped out in the middle of
a foggy night. When one of the deckhands came up out
of the focastle with a cigarette in the corner of his mouth,
the mate knocked him flat and said he’d have him arrested
 when he got back home for a damn German spy. They
toasted Spain as far as Finisterre. The skipper had just
 ^banged the course to southerly when they saw a sure
         i6o

598
enough periscope astern. The skipper grabbed the wheel
himself and yelled down the tube to the engine room to
give him everything they^d got, that wasn’t much to be
sure, and the gun crew started blazing away.
   The periscope disappeared but a couple of hours later
they overhauled a tubby kind of ketch, must be a Spanish
fishmgboat, that was heading for the shore, for Vigo prob-
ably, scudding along wing and wing in the half a gale
that was blowing up west northwest. They’d no sooner
crossed the wake of the ketch than there was a thud that
shook the ship and a column of water shot up that
drenched them all on the bridge. Everything worked like
clockwork. No. i was the only compartment flooded. A$
luck would have it, the crew was all out of the focastle
standing on deck amidships in their life preservers. The
Chemmg settled a little by the bow, that was all. The
gunners were certain it was a mine dropped by the old
black ketch that had crossed their bow and let them have
a couple of shots, but the ship was rolling so in the heavy
sea that the shots went wild. Anyway, the ketch went out
of sight behind the island that blocks the mouth of the
roadstead of Vigo. The Chemmg crawled on in under one
bell.
    By the time they got into the channel opposite the
town of Vigo, the water was gaining on the pumps in No,

2, and there was four feet of water in the engineroom.
They had to beach her on the banks of hard sand to the
nght of the town.
    So they were ashore again with their bundles standing
around outside the consul’s oiHce, waiting for him to find
them somewhere to flop. The consul was a Spaniard and
didn’t speak as much English as he might have but he
treated them fine. The Liberal Party of Vigo invited offi-

cers and crew to go to a bullfight there was going to bu
that afternoon. More monkeydoodle business, the skipper
Rot a cable to turn the ship over to the agents of Gome?

                                                                               i6i

599
and Ca. of Bilboa who had bought her as she stood and
were changing her registry.
   When they got to the bullring half the crowd cheered
them and yelled, “Viva los Aliados,” and the rest hissed
and shouted, “Viva Maura.^^ They thought there was
going to be a fight right there but the bull came out and
everybody quieted down. The bullfight was darn bloody,
but the boys with the spangles were some steppers and
the people sitting around made them drink wine all the
time out of little black skins and passed around bottles of
cognac so that the crew got pretty cockeyed and Joe spent
most of his time keeping the boys in order. Then the

officers were tendered a banquet by the local pro-allied
society and a lot of bozos with mustachios made fiery
speeches that nobody could understand and the Ameri-
cans cheered and sang. The Yanks are Coming and Keef
the Home Fires Burning and We^re Bounds for the Ham-
burg Show. The chief, an old fellow named McGillicudy,
did some card tricks, and the evening was a big success.
Joe and Glen bunked together at the hotel. The maid
there was awful pretty but wouldn’t let ’em get away with
any foolishness. “Well, Joe,” said Glen, before they went
to sleep, “it’s a great war.” “Well, I guess that’s strike
three,” said Joe. “That was no strike, that was a ball,”
said Glen.
    They waited two weeks in Vigo while the officials quar-
reled about their status and they got pretty fed up with
it Then they were all loaded on a train to take them to
Gibraltar where they were to be taken on board a Ship-
ping Board boat. They were three days on the train with
nothing to sleep on but hard benches. Spain was just one
 set of great dusty mountains after another. They changed
 cars in Madrid and in Seville and a guy turned up each
 time from the consulate to take care of them. When they
 got to Seville they found it was Algeciras they were going
 to instead of Gib.

          162

600
   When they got to Algeciras they found that nobody
had ever heard of them. They camped out in the con-
sulate while the consul telegraphed all over the place and
finally chartered two trucks and sent them over to Cadiz.
Spain was some country, all rocks and wine and busty
black eyed women and olive trees. When they got to
Cadiz the consular agent was there to meet them with a
telegram in his hand. The tanker GoU Shell was waiting
in Algeciras to take them on board there, so it was back
again cooped up on the trucks, bouncing on the hard
benches with their faces powdered with dust and their
mouths full of it and not a cent in anybody’s jeans left

to buy a drink with. When they got on board the Gold
Shell around three in the morning a bright moonlight
night some of the boys were so tired they fell down and
went to sleep right on the deck with their heads on their
seabags.




    The Gold Shell landed ’em In Perth Amboy in Tate
October, Joe drew his back pay and took the first train
connections he could get for Norfolk. He was fed up
with bawling out that bunch of pimps In the focastle.
Damn it, he was through with the seaj he was going to

settle down and have a little married life.
    He felt swell coming over on the ferry from Cape
 Charles, passing the Ripraps, out of the bay full of white-
 caps into the smooth brown water of Hampton Roads
 crowded with shippings four great battlewaggons at an-
 chor^ subchasers speeding in and out and a white revenue
 cutter, camouflaged freighters and colliers, a bunch of red
 munitions barges anchored off by themselves. It was a
 sparkling fall day. He felt good; he had three hundred
 and fifty dollars in his pocket. He had a good suit on and
 he felt sunbixrned and he’d just had a good meal. God

                                                                                163

601
 damn it^ he wanted a little love now. Maybe theyM have
 a kid.
    Things sure were different in Norfolk, Everybody in
new uniforms, twominute speakers at the corner of Main
 and Granby, liberty loan posters, bands playing. He
hardly knew the town walking up from the ferry. He’d
written Del that he was coming but he was worried about
seeing her, hadn’t had any letters lately. He still had a
latch key to the apartment but he knocked before open-
ing the door. There was nobody there.
    He’d always pictured her running to the door to meet
him. Still it was only four o’clock, she must be at her
work. Must have another girl with her, don’t keep the
house so tidy. . .   . Underwear hung to dry on a line, bits
of clothing on all the chairs, a box of candy with half-
eaten pieces in it on the table. . , . Jez, they must have
had a party last night. There was a half a cake, glasses
that had had liquor in them, a plate full of cigarette butts
and even a cigar butt. Oh, well, she’d probably had some
friends in. He went to the bathroom and shaved and
cleaned up a little. Sure Del was always popular, she
probably had a lot of friends in all the time, playing
cards and that. In the bathroom there was a pot of rouge
%nd lipsticks, and facepowder spilt over the faucets. It
made Joe feel funny shaving among all these women’s
things.
    He heard her voice laughing on the stairs and a man’s
voices the key clicked in the lock. Joe closed his suitcase
and stood up. Del had bobbed her hair. She flew up to
him and threw her arms around his neck. ^^Why, I declare
it’s my hubby.” Joe could taste rouge on her lips. ‘^My,
you look thin, Joe. Poor Boy, you musta been awful
sick. ... If I’d had any money at all I’d have jumped
on a boat and come on down. . , . This is W^ilmer Tay-
loe ... I mean Lieutenant Tayloe, he just got his com-
mission yesterday.”

        164

602
   Joe hesitated a moment and then held out his hand.
The other fellow had red hair clipped close and a freckled
face. He was all dressed up in a whipcord uniform, shiny
Sam Browne belt and puttees. He had a silver bar on each
shoulder and spurs on his feet.
   ^^He^s just going overseas tomorrow. He was coming
by to take me out to dinner. Oh, Joe, IVe got so much to
tell you, honey.”
   Joe and Lieutenant Tayloe stood around eyeing each
other uncomfortably while Del bustled around tidying
the place up, talking to Joe all the time. ^Tt’s terrible I
never get any chance to do anything and neither does?
Hilda .    . . You remember Hilda Thompson, Joe? Well,^
she’s been livin’ with me to help make up the rent but*
we’re both of us doin’ war work down at the Red Cross
canteen every evening and then I sell Liberty bonds.   . .   .
Don’t you hate the huns, Joe. Oh, I just hate them, and
so does Hilda. . . . She’s thinking of changing her name
on account of its being German. I promised to call her
Gloria but I always forget. .    . .You know, Wilmer, Joe’s
been torpedoed twice.”
    “Well, I suppose the first six times is the hardest,”
stammered Lieutenant Tayloe. Joe grunted.
    Del disappeared into the bathroom and closed the
door. “You boys make yourselves comfortable. I’ll be
dressed in a minute.”
    Neither of them said anything. Lieutenant Tayloe’s'
shoes creaked as he shifted his weight from one foot to
the other. At last he pulled a flask out of his hip pocket.
“Have a drink,” he said. “Ma outfit’s goin’ overseas any
time after midnight.” “I guess I’d better,” said Joe,
without smiling. When Della came out of the bathroom

all dressed up she certainly looked snappy. She was much,

prettier than last time Joe had seen her. He was all the
time wondering if he ought to go up and hit that damn

                                                                               165

603
  shavetail until at last he left, Del telling him to come by
  and get her at the Red Cross canteen.
      When he’d left she came and sat on Joe’s knee and
  asked him about everything and whether he’d got his sec-
  ond mate’s ticket yet and whether he’d missed her and
  how she wished he could make a little more money be-
 cause she hated to have another girl in with her this
  way but it was the only way she could pay the rent. She
  drank a little of the whiskey that the lieutenant had for-
 gotten on the table and ruffled his hair and loved him up.
 Joe asked her if Hilda was coming in soon and she said
 no she had a date and she was going to meet her at the
 canteen. But Joe went and bolted the door anyway and
 for the first time they w^ere really happy hugged in each
 other’s arms on the bed.
     Joe didn’t know what to do with himself around Nor-
 folk. Del was at the office all day and at the Red Cross
 canteen all the evening. He’d usually be in bed when she
 came home. Usually thefe’d be some damn army officer
 or other bringing her home, and he’d hear them talking
 and kidding outside the door and lie there in bed imag-
 ining that the guy was kissing her or loving her up. He’d
 be about ready to hit her when she’d come in and bawl
 her out and they’d quarrel and yell at each other and
 she’d always end by saying that he didn’t understand
 her and she thought he was unpatriotic to be interfering
 With her war work and sometimes they’d make up and
 he’d feel crazy in love with her and she’d make herself
 little and cute in his arms and give him little tiny kisses
 that made him almost cry they made him feel so happy.
 She was getting better looking every day and she sure
 was a snappy dresser.
     Sunday mornings she’d be too tired to get up and he’d
 cook breakfast for her and they’d sit up in bed together
 and eat breakfast like he had with Marceline that time in
 Bordeaux. Then she’d tell him she was crazy about him

          1 66

604
and what a smart guy he was and how she wanted him
to get a good shore job and make a lot of money so that
she wouldn^t have to work any more and how Captain
Barnes whose folks were worth a million had wanted her
to get a divorce from Joe and marry him and Mr. Can-
field in the Dupont office who made a cool 50,000 a year
had wanted to give her a pearl necklace but she hadn^t
taken it because she didn’t think it was right. Talk like
that made Joe feel pretty rotten. Sometimes he’d start to
talk about what they’d do if they had some kids, but Del
ud always make a funny face and tell him not to talk like
that.
    Joe went around looking for work and almost landed
the job of foreman in one of the repairshops over at the
shipyard in Newport News, but at the last minute another
berry horned in ahead of him and got it, A couple of
times he went out on parties with Del and Hilda Thomp-
son, and some army ofiicers and a midshipman off a de-
stroyer, but they all high-hatted him and Del let any
boy who wanted to kiss her and would disappear into a
phone booth with anything she could pick up so long as

it had a uniform on and he had a hell of a time. He found
a poolroom where some boys he knew hung out and
where he could get corn liquor and started tanking up a
good deal. It made Del awful sore to come home and
find him drunk but he didn’t care any more.
    Then one night when Joe had been to a fight with some
guys and had gotten an edge on afterward, he met Del and
another damn shavetail walking on the street. It was
pretty dark and there weren’t many people around and
they stopped in every dark doorway and the shavetail was
 kissing and hugging her. When he got them under a street
light so’s he made sure it was Del he went up to them
and asked them what the hell they meant. Del must have
 had some drinks because she started tittering in a shrill

 little voice that drove him crazy and he hauled off and let

                                                                               167

605
the shavetail have a perfect left right on the button. The
spurs tinkled and the shavetail went to sleep right flat on
the little grass patch under the streetlight. It began to hit
Joe kinder funny but Del was sore as the devil and said
she’d have him arrested for insult to the uniform and
assault and battery and that he was nothing but a yellow
snivelling slacker and what was he doing hanging around
home when all the boys were at the front fighting the
huns. Joe sobered up and pulled the guy up to his feet
and told them both they could go straight to hell. He
walked off before the shavetail, who musta been pretty

tight, had time to do anything but splutter, and went
straight home and packed his suitcase and pulled out.
   Will Stirp was in town so Joe went over to his house
and got him up out of bed and said he’d busted up house-
keeping and would Will lend him twentyfive bucks to
go up to New York with. Will said it was a damn good
thing and that love ’em and leave ’em was the only
thing for guys like them. They talked till about day about
one thing and another. Then Joe went to sleep and slept

till late afternoon. He got up in time to catch the Wash-
ington boat. He didn’t take a room but roamed around
on deck all night. He got to cracking with one of the offi-
cers and went and sat in the pilot house that smelt com-
fortably of old last year’s pipes. Listening to the sludge
of water from the bow and watching the wabbly white
finger of the searchlight pick up buoys and lighthouses he
began to pull himself together. He said he was going up
to New York to see his sister and try for a second mate’s
ticket with the Shipping Board. His stories about being
torpedoed went big because none of them on the Domimon
City had even been across the pond.
    It felt like old times standing in the bow m the sharp
November morning, sniffing the old brackish smell of the
Potomac water, passing redbrick Alexandria and Anacostia
and the Arsenal and the Navy Yard, seeing the Monu-
         i68

606
pient stick up pink through the mist in the early light.
The wharves looked about the same, the yachts and power
boats anchored opposite, the Baltimore boat just coming

in, the ramshackle excursion steamers, the oystershells
underfoot on the wharf, the nigger roustabouts standing
around. Then he was hopping the Georgetown car and
too soon he was walking up the redbrick street. While he
rang the bell he was wondering why he^d come home.
    Mommer looked older but she was in pretty good
shape and all taken up with her boarders and how the
girls were both engaged. They said that Janey was doing
so well in her work, but that living in New York had
changed her. Joe said he was going down to New York
to try to get his second mate’s ticket and that he sure
would look her up. When they asked him about the war
and the submarines and all that he didn’t know what to

tell ’em so he kinder bdded them along. He was glad
when It was time to go over to Washington to get his

train, though they were darn nice to him and seemed to
think that he was making a big success getting to be a
second mate so young. He didn’t tell ’em about being
married.




    Going down on the train to New York Joe sat in the
smoker looking out of the window at farms and stations
and billboards and the grimy streets of factory towns
through Jersey under a driving rain and everything he
saw seemed to remind him of Del and places outside of
Norfolk and good times he’d had when he was a kid.
When he got to the Penn Station in New York first thing
he did was check his bag, then he walked down Eighth
Avenue all shiny with rain to the corner of the street
where Janey lived. He guessed he’d better phone her

first and called from a cigarstore. Her voice sounded

                                                                               169

607
kinder stiffs vhe said she was busy and couldn’t see him

till tomorrow. He came out of the phonebooth and
walked down the street not knowing where to go. He had
a package Vinder his arm with a couple of Spanish shawls
he’d bought for her and Del on the last trip. He felt so
blue he wanted to drop the shawls and everything down
a drain, but he thought better of it and went back to the
checkroom at the station and left them in his suitcase.
Then he went and smoked a pipe for a while in the wait-
ingroorn.
    God damn it to hell he needed a drink. He went over
to Bi oadway and walked down to Union Square, stopping
in every place he could find that looked like a saloon but
they wouldn’t serve him anywhere. Union Square was
all lit up and full of navy recruiting posters. A big wooden
model of a battleship filled up one side of it. There was
a crowd standing around and a young girl dressed like a
sailor was making a speech about patriotism. The coH rain
came on again and the crowd scattered. Joe went down a
street and into a ginmill called The Old Farm. He must
have looked like somebody the barkeep knew because he
said hello and poured him out a shot of rye.
   Joe got to talking with two guys from Chicago who
were drinking whiskey with beer chasers. They said this
wartalk was a lot of bushwa propaganda and that if work-
ing stiffs stopped working in munition factories making
shells to knock other working stiffs’ blocks off with, there
wouldn’t be no goddam war. Joe said they were goddam
right but look at the big money you made. The guys from
Chicago said they’d been working in a munitions factory
themselves but they were through, goddam it, and that if
the working stiffs made a few easy dollars it meant that
the war profiteers were making easy millions. They said
the Russians had the right idea, make a revolution and
shoot the goddam profiteers and that ud happen in this

         170

608
country if they didn^t watch out and a damn good thing
too. The barkeep leaned across the bar and said they’d
oughtn’t to talk thataway, folks ud take ’em for German
spies.
   ^Why, you’re a German yourself, George,” said one
of the guys.
   The barkeep flushed and said, ^^Names don’t mean
nothin^ .  .  . I’m a patriotic American. I vas talking yust
for your good. If you vant to land in de hoosgow it’s not
my funeral.” But he set them up to drinks on the house
and it seemed to Joe that he agreed with ’em.
    They drank another round and Joe said it was all true
but what the hell could you do about it^ The guys said
what you could do about it was join the LW.W. and
carry a red card and be a classconscious worker. Joe said
that stuff was only for foreigners, but if somebody started
a white man’s party to fight the profiteers and the goddam
bankers he’d be with ’em. The guys from Chicago began
to get sore and said the wobblies were just as much white
men as he was and that political parties were the bunk
and that all southerners were scabs. Joe backed off and
was looking at the guys to see which one of ’em he’d hit

first when the barkeep stepped around from the end of
the bar and came between them. He was fat but he had
shoulders and a meanlooking pair of blue eyes.
    ^^Look here, you bums,” he said, ^^you listen to me,
sure I’m a Cherman but am I for de Kaiser? No, he’s a
schweinhunt, I am sokialist unt I live toity years in Union
City unt own my home unt pay taxes unt I’m a good
American, but dot don’t mean dot I vill foight for
Banker Morgan, not vonce. I know American vorkman

in de sokialist party toity years unt all dey do is foight
among each oder. Every sonofabitch denk him better der
de next sonofabitch. You loafers geroutahere , . . closin*

time . . . Pm goin’ to close up an’ go home.”

609
    One of the guys from Chicago started to laugh, “Well,

3 guess the drinks are on us, Oscar . . . it’ll be different
after the revolution.”
    Joe still wanted to hght but he paid for a round with
his last greenback and the barkeep who was still red in the
face from his speech, lifted a glass of beer to his mouth.
He blew the foam off it and said, “If I talk like dot I lose
 ny yob.”
    They shook hands all around and Joe went out into the
gusty northeast rain. He felt lit but he didn’t feel good.
He went up to Union Square again. The recruiting
speeches were over. The model battleship was dark. A
couple of ragged looking youngsters were huddled in the
lee of the recruiting tent. Joe felt lousy. He went down
into the subway and waited for the Brooklyn train.
   At Mrs. Olsen’s everything was dark. Joe rang and In
a little while she came down in a padded pink dressing
gown and opened the door. She was sore at being waked
up and bawled him out for drinking, but she gave him a
flop and next morning lent him fifteen bucks to tide him
over till he got work on a Shipping Board boat. Mrs.
Olsen looked tired and a lot older, she said she had pains
In her back and couldn’t get through her work any more.
   Next morning Joe put up some shelves in the pantry
for her and carried out a lot of litter before he went over
to the Shipping Board recruiting office to put his name
down for the officer’s school. The little kike behind the
desk had never been to sea and asked him a lot of dam-
fool questions and told him to come around next week
to find out what action would be taken on his application,
foe got sore and told him to f—k himself and walked out.
   He took Janey out to supper and to a show, but she
talked just like everybody else did and bawled him out
for cussing and he didn’t have a very good time. She liked
the shawls though and he was glad she was making out

610
so well in New York, He never did get around to talking

to her about Della,
   After taking her home he didn’t know what the hell

to do with himself. He wanted a drink, but taking Janey
out and everything had cleaned up the fifteen bucks he’d
borrowed from Mrs. Olsen. He walked west to a saloon
he knew on Tenth Avenue, but the place was closed:
wartime prohibition. Then he walked back towards Union
Square, maybe that feller Tex he’d seen when he was
walking across the square with Janey would still be sit-
ting there and he could chew the rag a while with him.
He sat down on a bench opposite the cardboard battle-
ship and began sizing it up: not such a bad job. Hell, I
wisht I’d never seen the inside of a real battleship, he was
thinking, when Tex slipped into the seat beside him and
put his hand on his knee. The minute he touched him Joe
knew he’d never liked the guy, eyes too close together:
‘^What you lookin’ so blue about, Joe^^ Tell me you’re
gettin’ your ticket.”
    Joe nodded and leaned over and spat carefully between
his feet.
    ^^What do you think of that for a model battleship,
pretty nifty, ain’t it? Jez, us guys is lucky not to be over-

seas fightin’ the fritzes in the trenches.”
    ^^Oh, I’d just as soon,” growled Joe.         wouldn’t give
a damn.”
    ^^Say, Joe, I got a job lined up. Guess I oughtn’t to
blab around about it, but you’re regular. I know you
won’t say nothin’. I been on the bum foi two weeks,
somethin’ wrong with my stomach. Man, I’m sick, I’m

tellin’ you. I can’t do no heavy work no more. A punk I
know works in a whitefront been slippin’ me my grub,

see. Well, I was sittin’ on a bench right here on the square,
a feller kinda well dressed sits down an’ starts to chum up.
Looked to me like one of these here sissies lookin’ for
rough trade, see, thought I’d roll him for some jack,

                                                                               172

611
what the hell, what can you do if youVe sick an’ can’t
work?”
    Joe sat leaning back with his legs stuck out, his hands in
his pockets staring hard at the outline of the battleship
against the buildings. Tex was talking fast, poking his face
into Joe’s: ^^Turns out the sonofabitch was a dick. S—^t I
was scared pissless. A secret service agent. Burns is his
big boss . . . but what he’s lookin’ for’s reds, slackers,
German spies, guys that can’t keep their traps shut . . .

Vin’ he turns around and hands me out a job, twentyfive
smackers a week if little Willy makes good. All I got to
do’s bum around and listen to guys talk, see? If I hears
anything that ain’t lOO per cent I slips the word to the
boss and he investigates. Twentyfive a week and servin’
my country besides, and if I gets in any kind of jam,
Burns gets me out. . . . What do you think of that for
the gravy, Joe?”
   Joe got to his feet. ^^Guess I’ll go back to Brooklyn.”
^^Stick around , . . look here, you’ve always treated me
white . . . you belong, I know that Joe . . . I’ll put
you next to this guy if you want. He’s a good scout, edu-
cated feller an’ all that and he knows where you can get
plenty liquor an’ women if you want ’em.” “Hell, Vm
goin’ to sea and get out of all this s—^t,” said Joe, turning
his back and walking towards the subway station.




                              THE CAMERA EYE (3+)


       his voice was three thousand miles away all the

time he kept wanting to get up outa bed his cheeks were

bright pink and the choky breathing No kid you better

lay there qmet we dont want you catching more cold

         174

612
that’s why they sent me down to stay with you to keep

you from getting up outa bed

       the barrelvaulted room all smells fever and white-

wash carbolic sick wops outside the airraid siren’s got a

nightmare

        (Mestre’s a railhead and its moonlight over the

Brenta and the basehospital and the ammunition dump

       carbolic blue moonlight)

       all the time he kept trying to get up outa bed Kidd(^

you better lay there quiet his voice was in Minnesota

but dontjaunerstandafellersgottogetup I got a date anim

portantengagementtoseeabout those lots ought never-

tohavestayedinbedsolate   I’ll lose my deposit Foi

chrissake dont you think I’m broke enough as it is?

        Kiddo you gotto lay there quiet         we’re in the hos-

pital in Mestre you got a little fever makes things seem

funny

        Cant you letafellerbe? You’re in cahoots withem

thaswhassematteris I know theyreouttorookme they

think Imagoddamsucker tomadethatdeposit I’ll showem

Illknockyergoddamblockoff
        my shadow on the vault bulkyciamsily staggering and

swaying from the one candle spluttering red in the raw

winterhospital carbolic night above the shadow on the cot

gotto keep his shoulders down to the cot Curley’s husky

inspite of                                         ^

         (you can hear their motors now the antiaircraft bat-

                                                                               175

613
teries are letting loose must be great up there in the moon-

light out of the smell of carbolic and latrines and siclr

wops)

       sit back and light a macedonia by the candle he

seems to be asleep his breathing’s so tough pneumonia

breathing can hear myself breathe and the water tick

In the faucet doctors and orderlies all down in the bomb-

proof cant even hear a sick wop groan

       Jesus is the guy dying?

       they’ve cut off their motors the little drums in my

ears sure that’s why they call em drums (up there in the

blue moonlight the Austrian observer’s reaching for the

string that dumps the applecart) the candleflame stands

up still

       not that time but wham in the side of the head woke

Curley and the glass tinkling In the upstairs windows the

candle staggered but didnt go out the vault sways with

my shadow and Curley’s shadow dammit he’s strong

head’s full of the fever reek Kiddo you gotto stay in

bed (they dumped the applecart allright) shellfragments

hailing around outside Kiddo you gotto get back to bed

        But I gotadate oh chrlstohsweetjesus cant you tell me
how to get back to the outfit haveaheart dad I didntmean-

noharm itsnonlyaboutthose lots

        the voice dwindles Into a whine I’m ptilling the

covers up to his chin again light the candle again smoke a

         176

614
macedonia again look at my watch again must be near day

ten o’clock they dont relieve me till* eight

        way off a voice goes up and up and swoops like the

airraid siren ayayoooTO


                                                      NEWSREEL XXV


        General Pershing’s forces today occupied Belle Joyeuse
Farm and the southern edges of the Bois des Loges. The
Americans encountered but little machinegun opposition. The
advance was in the nature of a linestraightening operation.
Otherwise the activity along the front today consisted prin-
cipally of artillery firing and bombing. Patrols are operating
around Belluno having preceded the flood of allies pouring
through the Quero pass in the Grappa region

                   REBEL SAILORS DEFY ALLIES

                     Bonjour ma cherte
                          Comment allez voust
                     Bonjour ma cherie
                          how do you do?

        after a long conference with a secretary of war and the
secretary of state President Wilson returned to the Whit^
House this afternoon apparently highly pleased that events are

steadily pursuing the course which he had felt they would take

                     Avex vous fiance? cela ne fah rien
                      Youlex vous couchex avec mol ce soir?
                      WeSy weCy combien?

                    HELP THE FOOD ADMINISTRATION BY
                           REPORTING WAR PROFITEERS

         Lord Robert, who is foreign minister Balfour’s right
hand man added, ‘‘When victory comes the responsibility for
America and Great Britain will rest not on statesmen but on
the people,” The display o-f th^ red flag in our thoroughfares

                                                                                        177

615
seems to be emblematic of unbridled licence and an insignia
for lawhating and anarchy, like the black flag it represents
everything that is repulsive
              LENINE FLEES TO FINLAND

       here I am snug as a bug in a rug on this third day of
October. It was Sunday I went over and got hit in the left
leg with a machmegun bullet above the knee, I am in a base
hospital and very comfortable. I am writing with my left
hand as my right one is under my head
     STOCK MARKET STRONG BUT NARROW
           Some day Pm going to murder the bugler
               Some day they^re going to find him dead
                   PIL dislocate his reveille
                   And Stef ufon it heavily
                      And sfend
                          the rest of my life in bed



                                A HOOSIER QUIXOTE


        Hibbefiy Paxton, journalist, IndianafoUs, Ind.,
Dec. 5j 1880, s. Thomas Entrekin and Jeannie Merrill
{Ketcham^ H.; A.B. Princeton igo^, A.M. Harvard
1904
        Thinking men were worried in the middle west in
the years Hibben was growing up there, something was
wrong with the American Republic, was it the Gold
Standard, Privilege, The Interests, Wall Street?
        The rich were getting richer, the poor were getting
poorer, small farmers were being squeezed out, work-
ingmen were working twelve hours a day for a bare
living; profits were for the rich, the law was for the
rich, the cops were for the rich;
         was it for that tiie pilgrims had bent their heads
         178

616
into the storm, filled the fleeing Indians with slugs out
of their blunderbusses
        and worked the stony farms of New England^
        was it for that the pioneers had crossed the Appa-
lachians,
        long squirrelguns slung across lean backs,
        a fistful of corn in the pocket of the buckskin vest,
        was it for that the Indiana farmboys had turned out
to shoot down Johnny Reb and make the black man
free?

        Paxton Hibben was a small cantankerous boy, son
of one of the best families (the Hibbens had a whole-
                                                                       in school the
sale dry goods business in Indianapolis) j
rich kids didn’t like him because he went around with
the poor kids and the poor kids didn’t like him because
his folks were rich,
        but he was the star pupil of Short Ridge High
        ran the paper,
        won all the debates.

        At Princeton he was the young collegian, editoi
of the Tiger, drank a lot, didn’t deny that he ran around
after girls, made a brilliant scholastic record and was
a thorn in the flesh of the godly. The natural course
for a bright young man of his class and position was to
study law, but Hibben wanted
        travel and romance a la Byron and de Musset,
well groomed adventures in foreign lands,
        so
        as his family was one of the best in Indiana and
friendly with Senator Beveridge he was gotten a post in

the diplomatic service:
        ^rd sec and 2nd sec American Embassy St. Peters-
burg and Mexico City igo^-6y sec Legation and Charge

d’affaires, Bogota, Colombia, igo8-g; The Hague and

                                                                               179

617
Luxemburg i^og-12^ Santiago de Chile igi2 {re-
tired).
                                                St. Petersburg was a young
        Pushkin for de Musset 3
dude’s romance:
        goldencrusted spires under a platinum sky,
        the icegrey Neva flowing swift and deep under
bridges that jingled with sleighbells3
        riding home from the Islands with the Grand
Duke’s mistress, the most beautiful most amorous singer
of Neapolitan streetsongS3
        staking a pile of rubles in a tall room glittering
with chandeliers, monocles, diamonds dripped on white
shoulders 3
        white snow, white cableclothes, white sheets,
        Kakhetian wine, vodka fresh as newmown hay,
Astrakhan caviar, sturgeon, Finnish salmon, Lapland
ptarmigan, and the most beautiful women in the world,

        but it was 1905, Hlbben left the embassy one night
and saw a flare of red against the trampled snow of the
Nevsky
        and red flags,
        blood frozen in the ruts, blood trickling down the
eartracks 3
        he saw the machineguns on the balconies of the
Winter Palace, the cossacks charging the unarmed
crowds that wanted peace and food and a little freedom,
        heard the throaty roar of the Russian Marseillaise,
        some stubborn streak in the old American blood
flared in revolt, he walked the streets all night with
the revolutionists, got in wrong at the embassy
        and was transferred to Mexico City where there
was no revolution yet, only peons and priests and the
stillness of the great volcanos.
        The Cientificos made him a member of the Jockey
Club
         180

618
        where in the magnificent building of blue Puebla

tile he lost all his money at roulette and helped them
drink up the last few cases of champagne left over from
the plunder of Cortez.

        Charge d’Affaires in Colombia (he never forgot
                                                          he believed passion-
he owed his career to Beveridge 5
ately in Roosevelt, and righteousness and reform, and

the antitrust laws, the Big Stick that was going to scare
away the grafters and malefactors of great wealth and

get the common man his due) he helped wangle the

revolution that stole the canal zone from the bishop of

               later he stuck up for Roosevelt in the Pulitzer
Bogota j
libel suit; he was a progressive, believed in the Canal
and T.R.
        He was shunted to the Hague where he went to

sleep during the vague deliberations of the Interna-

tional Tribunal.
         In 1912 he resigned from the Diplomatic Service
and went home to campaign for Roosevelt,
         got to Chicago in time to hear them singing On-
ward Christian Soldiers at the convention in the Colos-
seum; in the closepacked voices and the cheers, he

heard the trample of the Russian Marseillaise, the

 sullen silence of Mexican peons, Colombian Indians

 waiting for a deliverer, in the reverberance of the hymn
 he heard the measured cadences of the Declaration of

 Independence.

         The talk of social justice petered out; T.R. was

 a windbag like the rest of ’em, the Bull Moose was

 stuffed with the same sawdust as the G.O.P.
         Paxton Hibben ran for Congress as a progressive

 in Indiana but the European war had already taken

 people’s minds off sodal justice.
                                                                                181

619
                                                                                           ,




        War Corr Coilier^s Weekly                          stajf corr
Associated Press m Eurofe^                   war corr Leslie’s
Weekly in "Near East and sec Russian commn for Near
East Relief, June-Dee igai
        In those years he forgot all about the diplomat’s
mauve silk bathrobe and the ivory toilet sets and the

little tete-a-tetes with grandduchesses,
        he went to Germany as Beveridge’s secretary, saw
the German troops goosestepping through Brussels,
        saw Poincare visiting the long doomed galleries
of Verdun between ranks of bitter halfmutinous sol-
diers in blue,
        saw the gangrened wounds, the cholera, the typhus,
the little children with their bellies swollen with famine,
the maggoty corpses of the Serbian retreat, drunk Allied
officers chasing sick naked girls upstairs in the brothels
in Saloniki, soldiers looting stores and churches, French
and British sailors fighting with beerbottles in the bars
        walked up and down the terrace with King Con-
stantine during the bombardment of Athens, fought a
duel with a French commission agent who got up and
left when a German sat down to eat in the diningroom
at the Grande Bretagne; Hibben thought the duel was a
joke until all his friends began putting on silk hats; he
stood up and let the Frenchman take two shots at him
and then fired into the ground; in Athens as every-
where he was always in hot water, a slightly built
truculent man, always standing up for his friends, for
people out of luck, for some idea, too reckless ever to
lay down the careful steppingstones of a respectable
career.

         Commd ist lieut F.A. Nov ay-xgiy; capt May
Si-igig; served at war coll camp Grant-, in France with
SS^nd E.A.; Finance Bureem S.O.S.; at G.H.Q. in
         182

620
office of Insf Gen of A.E.F.; discharged Aug. 21^
igig; caft O.R.C. Feb yth ig2o; recommd Feh 7-

        The war in Europe was bloody and dirty and dull,
but the war in New York revealed such slimy depths
of vileness and hypocrisy that no man who saw it can
                                              in the army training camps
ever feel the same again j
it was different, the boys believed in a world safe for
                      Hibben believed in the Fourteen Points,
Democracy 5
he believed in The War To End War.

        With mil Mission to Armenia Aug-Dec igig; staff
corr in Eurofe for the Chicago Tribune; with the Near
East Relief ig2 0-22; sec Russian Red Cross commn in
America ig22; v dir for U.S. Nansen Relief Mission
1925; sec AM Commn Relief Russian Children Apr
1922
        In the famineyear the cholera year the typhusyear
Paxton Hibben went to Moscow with a relief commis^
sion.
        In Paris they were still haggling over the price
of blood, squabbling over toy flags, the riverfrontiers
on reliefmaps, the historical destiny of peoples, while
behind the scenes the good contractplayers, the Deterd-
ings, the Zahkaroffs, the Stinnesses sat quiet and pos-
sessed themselves of the raw materials.
         In Moscow there was order,

        in Moscow there was work,
        in Moscow there was hope 5
        the Marseillaise of 1905, Onward Christian SoF
diers of 1912, the sullen passiveness of American In-

dians, of infantrymen waiting for death at the front
was part of the tremendous roar of the Marxian Inter-

nationale.
         Hibben believed in the new world.

                                                                               183

621
                                                                        ;




        Back in America
        somebody got hold of a photograph of Captain
Paxton Hibben laying a wreath on Jack Reed’s grave j
they tried to throw him out of the O.R.C.
        at Princeton at the twentieth reunion of his col-
lege class his classmates started to lynch himj they were
drunk and perhaps it was just a collegeboy prank twenty
years too late but they had a noose around his neck,
        lynch the goddam red,
        no more place in America for change, no more
place for the old gags: social justice, progressivism, re-
volt against oppression, democracy} put the reds on the
skids,
        no money for them,
        no jobs for them.

        Mem Authors League of America^ Soc of Colonial
WarSy Vets Foreign Wars, Am Legion, fellow Royal
and Am Geog Socs. Decorated chevalier Order of St.
Stanislas {Russian), Officer Order of the Redeemer
{Greek), Order of the Sacred Treasure {Jafan). Clubs
Princeton, Newsfafer, Civic {New York)
        Author: Constantine and the Greek Peofle 1920,
The Famine in Russia 1922, Henry Ward Beecher an
American Portrait 192^.
        d. 1929.

                                              NEWSREEL XXVI


                  EUROPE ON KNIFE EDGE
                       Tout le long de la Thamise
                       Nous sommes alles tout les deux
                       Gouter Pheure exquise.

622
        m such conditions is it surprising that the Department of
Justice looks with positive affection upon those who refused
service in the draft, with leniency upon convicted anarchists
and with something like indifference upon the overwhelming
majority of them still out of jail or undeported for years after
the organization of the U. S. Steel Corporation Wall Street
was busy on the problem of measuring the cubic yards of water
injected into the property

       FINISHED STEEL MOVES RATHER MORE FREELY

                      Where do we go from here boys
                          Where do we go from here?

                           WILD DUCKS FLY OVER PARIS

FERTILIZER INDUSTRY STIMULATED BY WAR

                          Anywhere from Harlem
                              To a Jersey City per

        the winning of the war is just as much dependent upon
the industrial workers as it is upon the soldiers. Our wonder-

ful record of launching one hundred ships on independence
day shows what can be done when we put our shoulders to the

wheel under the spur of patriotism

SAMARITAINE BATHS SINK IN SWOLLEN
                                             SEINE

                               I may not know
                                    What the waiAs about
                               But you bet by gosh
                                    Pll soon find out
                               And so my sweetheart
                                   Don^t you fear
                                Pll bring you a king
                                    For a souvenir
                                And Pll get you a Turk
                                    And the Kaiser too
                                And thaPs about all
                                    One feller can do

                                                                                        185

623
A.FTER~WAR PLANS OF AETNA EXPLOSIVES

       ANCIENT CITY IN GLOOM EVEN THE CHURCH
                 BELLS ON SUNDAY BEING STILLED

                   Where do we go from here hoys
                       Where do we go from here?



     RICHARD ELLSWORTH SAVAGE


    It was at Fontainebleau lined up in the square in front
of Francis Ps palace they first saw the big grey Fiat ambu-
lances they were to drive. Schuyler came back from talking
with the French drivers who were turning them over with
the news that they were sore as hell because it meant they
had to go back into the front line. They asked why the
devil the Americans couldn’t stay home and mind their
own business instead of coming over here and filling up
all the good embusque jobs. That night the section went
into cantonment in tarpaper barracks that stank of carbolic,
in a little town In Champagne. It turned out to be the
Fourth of July, so the marechale-de-logis served out
champagne with supper and a general with white walrus
whiskers came and made a speech about how with the help
of Amerique herolque la victoire was certain, and proposed
a toast to le president Veelson. The chef of the section,
Bill Knickerbocker, got up a little nervously and toasted
la France heroique, I’heroique Cinquieme Armee and la

victoire by Christmas. Fireworks were furnished by the
Boches who sent over an airraid that made everybody
scuttle for the bombproof dugout.
    Once they got down there Fred Summers said it smelt
too bad and anyway he wanted a drink and he and Dick
Went out to find an estaminet, keeping close under the eaves

        i86

624
of the houses to escape the occasional shrapnel fragments
from the antiaircraft guns. They found a little bar all full
of tobacco smoke and French poilus singing la Madelon,
Everybody cheered when they came in and a dozen glasses
were handed to them. They smoked their first caporal
ordinaire and everybody set them up to drinks so that at
closing time, when the bugles blew the French equivalent
of taps, they found themselves walking a little unsteadily
along the pitchblack streets arm in arm with two poilus
who’d promised to find them their cantonment. The poilus
said la guerre was une saloperie and la victorie was une
sale blague and asked eagerly if les americains knew any-
thing about la revolution en Russie. Dick said he was a
pacifist and was for anything that would stop the war and
they all shook hands very significantly and talked about
la revolution mondiale. When they were turning in on
their folding cots, Fred Summers suddenly sat bolt up-
right with his blanket around him and said in a solemn
funny way he had, ^Tellers, this ain’t a war, it’s a goddam
madhouse.”
    There were two other fellows in the section who liked

to drink wine and chatter bad French, Steve Warner,
who’d been a special student at Harvard, and Ripley who
was a freshman at Columbia. The five of them went
around together, finding places to get omelettes and pom-
mes frites m the villages within walking distance, making
                                                                      they got to be
the rounds of the estaminets every night j
known as the grenadine guards. When the section moved
 up onto the Voie Sacree back of Verdun and was quartered

 for three rainy weeks in a little ruined village called Erize

 la Petite, they set up their cots together in the same corner
 of the old brokendown barn they were given for a canton-^

                                                             all day and all nighf
 ment. It rained all day and all night 3
 camions ground past through the deep liquid putty of th<i
 roads carrying men and munitions to Verdun. Dick used
 to sit on his cot looking out through the door at the jiggling

                                                                               187

625
mudspattered faces of the young French soldiers going up
for the attack, drunk and desperate and yelling a bas la
guerre, mort au vaches, a bas la guerre. Once Steve came in
suddenly, his face pale above the dripping poncho, his eyes
snapping, and said in a low voice, ^^Now I know what the
tumbnls were like in the Terror, that’s what they are,

tumbrils.”
   Dick was relieved to find out, when they finally moved
up within range of the guns, that he wasn’t any more
scared than anybody else. The first time they went on post
he and Fred lost their way in the shellshredded woods and
were trying to turn the car around on a little rise naked as
the face of the moon when three shells from an Austrian
eightyeight went past them like three cracks of a whip.
They never knew how they got out of the car and into
the ditch, but when the sparse blue almondsmelling smoke
cleared they were both lying flat in the mud. Fred went
to pieces and Dick had to put his arm around him and
keep whispering in his ear, ^^Come on, boy, we got to make

it. Come on, Fred, we’ll fool ’em.” It all hit him funny
and he kept laughing all the way back along the road
into the quieter section of the woods where the dressing
station had been cleverly located right in front of a bat-
tery of 405s so that the concussion almost bounced the
wounded out of their stretchers every time a gun was fired.
When they got back to the section after taking a load to
the triage they were able to show three jagged holes from
shellfragments in the side of the car.
    Next day the attack began and continual barrages and
coxxnterbarrages and heavy gasbombardmentsj the section
was on twentyfour hour duty for three days, at the end of
It everybody had dysentery and bad nerves. One fellow
got shellshock, although he’d been too scared to go on
post, and had to be sent back to Paris. A couple of men
had to be evacuated for dysentery. The grenadine guards
came through the attack pretty well, except that Steve
         188

626
and Ripley had gotten a little extra sniff of mustard gas
up at P2 one night and vomited whenever they ate any-
thing.
    In their twentyfour hour periods off duty they^d meet
in a little garden at Recicourt that was the section’s base.
No one else seemed to know about it. The garden had
been attached to a pink villa but the villa had been mashed
to dust as if a great foot had stepped on it. The garden
was untouched, only a little weedy from neglect, roses
were in bloom there and butterflies and bees droned around
the flowers on sunny afternoons. At first they took the bees
for distant arrives and went flat on their bellies when they
heard them. There had been a cement fountain in the mid-
dle of the garden and there they used to sit when the
Germans got it into their heads to shell the road and the
nearby bridge. There was regular shelling three times a
day and a little scattering between times. Somebody would
be detailed to stand in line at the Cope and buy south of
France melons and four franc fifty champagne. Then
they’d take off their shirts to toast their backs and shoulders

if It was sunny and sit in the dry fountain eating the melons
and drinking the warm cidery champagne and talk about
how they’d go back to the States and start an underground
newspaper like La Libre Belgique to tell people what the
war was really like.
    What Dick liked best in the garden was the little back-
 house, like the backhouse in a New England farm, with a
 clean scrubbed seat and a half moon in the door, through
which on sunny days the wasps who had a nest in the ceiling
 hummed busily in and out. He’d sit there with his belly
 aching listening to the low voices of his friends talking

 in the driedup fountain. Their voices made him feel happy
 and at home while he stood wiping himself on a few old
 yellowed squares of a 1914 Petit Journal that still hung
 on the nail. Once he came back buckling his belt and say-

 ing, ^^Do you know? I was thinking how fine it would be

                                                                               X89

627
if you could reorganize the cells of your body into some
other kind of life . . . it’s too damn lousy being a human

. .   . Pd like to be a cat, a nice comfortable housecat sit-

ting by the fire.”
   “It’s a hell of a note/’ said Steve, reaching for his shirt
and putting it on. A cloud had gone over the sun and it
was suddenly chilly. The guns sounded quiet and distant.
Dick felt suddenly chilly and lonely. “It’s a hell of a note
when you have to be ashamed of belonging to your own
race. But I swear I am, I swear I’m ashamed of being a
man ... it will take some huge wave of hope like a
revolution to make me feel any selfrespect ever again. . . .
God, we’re a lousy cruel vicious dumb type of tailless ape.”
“Well, if you want to earn your selfrespect, Steve, and
the respect of us other apes, why don’t you go down, now
that they’re not shelling, and buy us a bottle of champagny
water?” said Ripley,


   After the attack on hill 304 the division went en repos
back of Bar-le-Duc for a couple of weeks and then up
into a quiet section of the Argonne called le Four de Paris
where the French played chess with the Boches in the front
line and where one side always warned the other before
setting off a mine under a piece of trench. When they were
off duty they could go into the inhabited and undestroyed
town of Sainte Menehoulde and eat fresh pastry and
pumpkin soup and roast chicken. When the section was
disbanded and everybody sent back to Pans Dick hated to
leave the mellow autumn woods of the Argonne. The
U. S. army was to take over the ambulance service at-
tached to the French. Everybody got a copy of the section’s
               Dick Norton made them a speech under shelT
citation j
fire, never dropping the monocle out of his eye, dismissing
them as gentlemen volunteers and that was the end of the
section.
    Except for an occasional shell from the Bertha, Paris
         190

628
was quiet and pleasant that November. It was too foggy
for airraids. Dick and Steve Warner got a very cheap
                                                  in the daytime they read
room back of the Pantheon 5
French and in the evenings roamed round cafes and drink-
ing places. Fred Summers got himself a job with the Red
Cross at twentyfive dollars a week and a steady girl the
second day they hit Paris. Ripley and Ed Schuyler took
lodgings in considerable style over Henry’s bar. They all

ate dinner together every night and argued themselves sick
about what they ought to do. Steve said he was going
home and C.O. and to hell with it Ripley and Schuyler
                                                         5
said they didn’t care what they did as long as they kept out
of the American army, and talked about joining the For-
eign Legion or the Lafayette Escadrille.
    Fred Summers said, “Fellers, this war’s the most gigan-

tic cockeyed graft of the century and me for it and the
cross red nurses.” At the end of first week he was holding
down two Red Cross jobs, each at twentyfive a week, and
being kept by a middleaged French marraine who owned
a big house in Neuilly. When Dick’s money gave out Fred
borrowed some for him from his marraine, but he never
would let any of the others see her. “Don’t want you
fellers to know what Pm in for,” he’d say.
    At lunchtime one day Fred Summers came round to
say that everything was fixed up and that he had jobs for
them all. The wops, he explained, were pretty well shot
 after Caporetto and couldn’t get out of the habit of re-
 treating. It was thought that sending an American Red
 Cross ambulance section down would help their morale
 He was in charge of recruiting for the time being and had
 put all their names down. Dick immediately said he spoke
 Italian and felt he’d be a great help to the morale of the

 Italians, so the next morning they were all at the Red Cross

 office when it opened and were duly enrolled in Section i
 of the American Red Cross for Italy. There followed a
 couple more weeks waiting around during which Fred

                                                                               191

629
Summers took on a mysterious Serbian lady he picked up
m a cafe back o£ the Place St. Michel who wanted to teach
them to take hashish, and Dick became friends with a
drunken Montenegran who’d been a barkeep in New York
and who promised to get them all decorated by King
Nicholas of Montenegro. But the day they were going
to be received at Neuilly to have the decorations pinned
on, the section left.
   The convoy of twelve Fiats and eight Fords ran along
the smooth macadam roads south through the Forest of
Fontainebleau and wound east through the winecolored
hills of central France. Dick was driving a Ford alone and
was so busy trying to remember what to do with his feet
he could hardly notice the scenery. Next day they went
over the mountains and down into the valley of the Rhone,
into a rich wine country with planetrees and cypresses,
smelling of the vintage and late fall roses and the south.
By Montelimar, the war, the worry about jail and protest
and sedition all seemed a nightmare out of another century.
   They had a magnificent supper in the quiet pink and
white town with cepes and garlic and strong red wine.
^Tellers,” Fred Summers kept saying, ^^this ain’t a war,
it’s a goddam Cook’s tour.” They slept in style in the big
brocadehung beds at the hotel, and when they left in the
morning a little schoolboy ran after Dick’s car shouting
Vive I’Amerique and handed him a box of nougat, the local
specialty^ it was the land of Cockaigne.
   That day the convoy fell to pieces running into Mar-
            discipline melted away drivers stopped at all the
seilles j                                     5
wineshops along the sunny roads to drink and play craps.
The Red Cross publicity man and the Saturday Evemng
Post correspondent who was the famous writer, Mont-
gomery Ellis, got hideously boiled and could be heard
whooping and yelling in the back of the staffcar, while the
little ht lieutenant ran up and down the line of cars at
every stop red and hy'^terically puffing. Eventually they
        192

630
were all rounded up and entered Marseilles in formation,
They^d just finished parking in a row in the main square
and the boys were settling back into the bars and cafes
round about, when a man named Ford got the bright idea
of looking into his gasoline tank with a match and blew his
car up. The local firedepartment came out in style and
when car No. 8 was properly incinerated turned their high“
pressure hose on the others, and Schuyler, who spoke the
best French in the section, had to be dragged away from a
conversation with the cigarette girl at the corner cafe to
beg the firechief for chrissake to lay off.
   With the addition of a fellow named Sheldrake who was
an expert on folkdancmg and had been in the famous sec-
tion 7, the grenadine guards dined in state at the Bristol
They continued the evening at the promenoire at the
Apollo, that was so full of all the petite femmes in the
world, they never saw the show. Everything was cock-
eyed and full of women, the shnll bright main streets with
their cafes and cabarets, and the black sweaty tunnels of
streets back of the harbor full of rumpled bed& and sailors
and black skin and brown skin, wriggling bellies, flopping
puiplewhite breasts, grinding thighs.
    Very late Steve and Dick found themselves alone in a

little restaurant eating ham and eggs and coffee. They were
drunk and sleepy and quarrelling drowsily. When they
paid, the middleaged waitress told them to put the tip on
the corner of the table and blew them out of their chairs
by calmly hoisting her skirts and picking up the coins
between her legs.
    ^TFs a hoax, a goddam hoax. , . . Sex is a slotmachine/^
Steve kept saying and it seemed gigantically funny, so
funny that they went into an early morning bar and tried

to tell the man behind the counter about it, but he didn^t
understand them and wrote out on a piece of paper the
name of an establishment where they could faire rigajig,
une maison^ propre, convenable, et de haute moralite.

                                                                               193

631
Hooting with laughter they found themselves reeling and
stumbling as they climbed endless stairways. The wind was
cold as hell. They were in front of a crazylooking cathe-

dral looking down on the harbor, steamboats, great ex-
panses of platinum sea hemmed in by ashen mountains.
^^By God, thads the Mediterranean.”
   They sobered up in the cold jostling wind and the wide
metallic flare of dawn and got back to their hotel in time
to shake the others out of their drunken slumbers and be
the first to report for duty at the parked cars. Dick was
so sleepy he forgot what he ought to do with his feet and
ran his Ford into the car ahead and smashed his headlights.
The fat lieutenant bawled him out shrilly and took the car
away from him and put him on a Fiat with Sheldrake, so
he had nothing to do all day but look out of his drowse at
the Corniche and the Mediterranean and the redroofed
towns and the long lines of steamboats bound east hugging
the shore for fear of Uboats, convoyed by an occasional
French destroyer with its smokestacks in all the wrong
places.
    Crossing the Italian border they were greeted by crowds
of schoolchildren with palmleaves and baskets of oranges,
and a movie operator. Sheldrake kept stroking his beard
and bowing and saluting at the cheers of evviva gli
americani, until zowie, he got an orange between the eyes
that pretty near gave him a nosebleed. Another man down
the line came within an inch of having his eye put out by
a palmbranch thrown by a delirious inhabitant of Vinti-
miglia. It was a great reception. That night in San Remo
enthusiastic wops kept running up to the boys on the street,
shaking their hands and congratulating them on il Presi-
dente Veelson, somebody stole all the spare tires out of
the camionette and the Red Cross Publicity Man^s suitcase
that had been left in the staffcar. They were greeted
effusively and shortchanged in the bars. Evviva gli aleati.
    Everybody in the section began to curse out Italy and

         194

632
the rubber spaghetti and the vinegary wine, except Dici<
and Steve, who suddenly became woplovers and bought
themselves grammars to learn the language. Dick already
gave a pretty good imitation of talking Italian, especially
before the Red Cross officers, by putting an o on the end of
all the French words he knew. He didn’t give a damn
about anything any more. It was sunny, vermouth was a
great drink, the towns and the toy churches on the tops of
hills and the vineyards and the cypresses and the blue sea
were like a succession of backdrops for an oldfashioned
opera. The buildings were stagy and ridiculously mag-
               on every blank wall the damn wops had painted
nificent j
windows and colonnades and balconies with fat Titian-
haired beauties leaning over them and clouds and covies of
dimpletummied cupids.
    That night they parked the convoy in the main square of
a godforsaken little burg on the outshrts of Genoa. They
went with Sheldrake to have a drink in a bar and found
themselves drinking with the Saturday Evemng Post
correspondent who soon began to get tight and to say how
he envied them their good looks and their sanguine youth
and idealism. Steve picked him up about everything and
argued bitterly that youth was the lousiest time in your

life, and that he ought to be goddam glad he was forty
years old and able to write about the war instead of fight-
ing in it. Ellis goodnaturedly pointed out that they weren’t
fighting either. Steve made Sheldrake sore by snapping
out, “No, of course not, we’re goddamned embusques.”
He and Steve left the bar and ran like deer to get out of
sight before Sheldrake could follow them. Around the
corner they saw a streetcar marked Genoa and Steve hopped

it without saying a word. Dick didn’t have anything to
do but follow.
    The car rounded a block of houses and came out on the
waterfront. “Judas Priest, Dick,” said Steve, “the goddam
town’s on fire,” Beyond the black hulks of boats drawn up

                                                                               195

633
on the shore a rosy flame like a gigantic lampflame sent a
broad shimmer towards them across the water. ^^Gracious,

Steve, do you suppose the Austrians are in there?”
   The car went whanging along3 the conductor who came
and got their fare looked calm enough. ^Tnglese?” he
asked. ^^Americani,” said Steve. He smiled and clapped
them on the back and said something about the Presidente
Veelson that they couldn^ understand.
   They got off the car in a big square surrounded by huge
arcades that a raw bittersweet wind blew hugely through.
Dressedup people in overcoats were walking up and down
on the clean mosaic pavement. The town was all marble.
Every fagade that faced the sea was pink with the glow
of the fire. ^^Here the tenors and the baritones and the
sopranos all ready for the show to begin,” said Dick. Steve
grunted, ^^Chorusll probably be the goddam Austrians.”
   They were cold and went into one of the shiny nickel
and plateglass cafes to have a grog. The waiter told them
in broken English that the fire was on an American tanker
that had hit a mine and that she’d been burning for three
days. A longfaced English officer came over from the bar
and started to tell them how he w^as on a secret mission j
                                                                  it hadn’t stopped
it was all bloody awful about the retreat j
yetj in Milan they were talking about falling back on the
Poj the only reason the bloody Austrians hadn’t overrun
all bloody Lombardy was they’d been so disorganized by
their rapid advance they were in almost as bad shape as the
bloody Italians were. Damned Italian officers kept talking
about the quadrilateral, and if it wasn’t for the French and
British troops behind the Italian lines they’d have sold out
long ago. French morale was pretty shaky, at that. Dick
told him about how the tools got swiped every time they
took their eyes off their cars. The Englishman said the
                                                                      that was what
thievery in these parts was extraordinary 5
                                                  he was trying to trace an
his secret mission was about j
entire carload of boots that had vanished between Vinti-

         196

634
miglia and San Raphael, Whole bloody luggage van turns
into thin air overnight , . . extraordinary.       . . » See those
blighters over there at that table, they’re bloody Austrian
spies every mother’s son o£ them ... but try as I can I
can’t get them arrested . . . extraordinary. It’s a bloody
melodrama that’s what it is, just like Drury Lane. A jolly
good thing you Americans have come in. If you hadn’t
you’d see the bloody German flag flying over Genoa at
this minute.” He suddenly looked at his wristwatch, ad-
vised them to buy a bottle of whiskey at the bar if they
wanted another bit of drink, because it was closing time,
said cheeryoh, and hustled out.
   They plunged out again into the empty marble town,
down dark lanes and streets of stone steps with always the
glare on some jutting wall overhead brighter and redder
as they neared the waterfront. Time and again they got
        at last they came out on wharves and bristle of masts
lost j
of crowded feluccas and beyond the little crimsontipped
waves of the harbor, the breakwater, and outside the break-
water the mass of flame of the burning tanker. Excited and
drunk they walked on and on through the town: ^^By God,
these towns are older than the world,” Dick kept saying.
   While they were looking at a marble lion, shaped like a
dog, that stood polished to glassy smoothness by centuries
of hands at the bottom of a flight of steps, an American
voice hailed them, wanting to know if they knew their way
around this goddam town. It was a young fellow who was
a sailor on an American boat that had come over with a
carload of mules. They said sure they knew their way and
gave him a drink out of the bottle of cognac they’d bought.
They sat there on the stone balustrade beside the lion that
looked like a dog and swigged cognac out of the bottle and
talked. The sailor showed them some silk stockings he’d
salvaged off the burning oilship and told them about how
he’d been jazzing an Eyetalian girl only she’d gone to

sleep and he’d gotten disgusted and walked out on hen

                                                                              197

635
                  y




          war^s hell ain’t it de truth?” he saidj they all got to
laughing.
   “You guys seem to be a couple of pretty good guys/’ the

sailor said. They handed him the bottle and he took a gulp.
“You fellers are princes/’ he added spluttering, “and I’m
goin’ to tell you what I think, see. .      . . This whole god-
dam war’s a gold brick, it ain’t on the level, its crooked
from A to Z. No matter how it comes out fellers like us
gets the s— end of the stick, see? Well, what I say is all
bets is off . . . every man go to hell in his own way . . .
and three strikes is out, see?” They finished up the cognac.
    Singing out savagely, “To hell wid ’em I say,” the
sailor threw the bottle with all his might against the head
of the stone lion. The Genoese lion went on staring ahead
with glassy dofjlike eyes.
    Sourlookmg loafers started gathenng around to see
what the troul le was so they moved on, the sailor waving
his silk stockings as he walked. They found him his steamer
tied up to the. dock and shook hands again and again at the
gangplank.
    Then it was up to Dick and Steve to get themselves back
across the ten miles to Ponte Decimo. Chilly and sleepy
they walked until their feet were sore, then hopped a wop
truck the rest of the way. The cobbles of the square and
the roofs of the cars were covered with hoarfrost when
they got there. Dick made a noise getting into the stretcher
beside Sheldrake’s and Sheldrake woli up, “What the
hell?” he said. “Shut up,” said Dick, “don’t you see you’re
waking people up ? ”

    Next day they got to Milan, huge wintry city with its
overgrown pincushion cathedral and its Galleria jammed
with people and restaurants and newspapers and whores
and Cinzano and Campari Bitters. There followed another
period of waiting during which most of the section settled
down to an endless crapgame in the back room at Cova’sj
then they moved out to a place called Dolo on a frozen

         198

636
canal somewhere in the Venetian plain. To get to the ele-
gant carved and painted villa where they were quartered
they had to cross the Brenta. A company of British sappers
had the bridge all mined and ready to blow up when the
retreat began again. They promised to wait till Section i
had crossed before blowing the bridge up. In Dolo there
was very little to doj it was raw wintry weather, while
most of the section sat around the stove and swapped their
jack at poker, the grenadine guards made themselves hot
rum punches over a gasoline burner, read Boccaccio in
Italian and argued with Steve about anarchism.
   Dick spent a great deal of his time wondering how he
was going to get to Venice. It turned out that the fat
lieutenant was worried by the fact that the section had
no cocoa and that the Red Cross commissary in Milan
hadn’t sent the section any breakfast foods. Dick suggested
that Venice was one of the world’s great cocoamarkets, and
that somebody who knew Italian ought to be sent over
                                  so one frosty morning Dick found
there to buy cocoa 3
himself properly equipped with papers and seals boarding
the little steamboat at Mestre.
    There was a thin skim of ice on the lagoon that tore with
a sound of silk on either side of the narrow bow where Dick
stood leaning forward over the rail, tears in his eyes from
the raw wind, staring at the long rows of stakes and the
light red buildings rising palely out of the green water to
bubblelike domes and square pointedtipped towers that
etched themselves sharper and sharper against the zinc

sky. The hunchback bridges, the greenslimy steps, the

palaces, the marble quays were all empty. The only life
was in a group of torpedoboats anchored in the Grand
Canal. Dick forgot all about the cocoa walking through
sculptured squares and the narrow streets and quays along
the icefilled canals of the great dead city that lay there on

the lagoon frail and empty as a cast snakeskin. To the
north he could hear the tomtomming of the guns fifteen

                                                                              199

637
miles away on the Piave. On the way back it began to
snow.
    A few days later they moved up to Bassano behind
Monte Grappa into a late renaissance villa all painted up
with cupids and angels and elaborate draperies. Back of
the villa the Brenta roared day and night under a covered
bridge. There they spent their time evacuating cases of
frozen feet, drinking hot rum punches at Citadella where
the base hospital and the whorehouses were, and singing
The Foggy Foggy Dew and The Little Black Bull Came
Down From the Mountain over the rubber spaghetti at
chow. Ripley and Steve decided they wanted to learn to
draw and spent their days off drawing architectural details
or the covered bridge. Schuyler practiced his Italian talking
about Nietzsche with the Italian Lieut. Fred Summers
had gotten a dose off a Milanese lady who he said must
have belonged to one of the best families because she was
riding in a carriage and picked him up, not he her, and
spent most of his spare time brewing himself home reme-
dies like cherry stems in hot water. Dick got to feeling
lonely and blue, and in need of privacy, and wrote a great
many letters home. The letters he got back made him feel
worse than not getting any.
    ^^You must understand how it is,” he wrote the Thur-
lows, answering an enthusiastic screed of Hilda^s about the
^Var to end war,” “I donT believe in Christianity any
more and can^t argue from that standpoint, but you do, or
at least Edwin does, and he ought to realize that in urging
young men to go into this cockeyed lunatic asylum of war
he^s doing everything he can to undermine all the principles
and ideals he most believes in. As the young fellow we had
that talk with in Genoa that night said, ids not on the level,
it^s a dirty goldbrick game put over by governments and
politicians for their own selfish interests, ids crooked from
A to Z. If it wastft for the censorship I could tell you
things that would make you vomit.”
        aoo

638
   Then heM suddenly 'snap out of his argumentative
mood and all the phrases about liberty and civilization
steaming up out of his head would seem damn silly tooj
and he’d light the gasoline burner and make a rum punch
and cheer up chewing the rag with Steve about books or
painting or architecture. Moonlight nights the Austrians
made things lively by sending bombing planes over. Some
nights Dick found that staying out of the dugout and
giving them a chance at him gave him a sort of bitter
pleasure, and the dugout wasn’t any protection against a
direct hit anyway.
    Sometime in February Steve read in the paper that the
Empress Taitu of Abyssinia had died. They held a wake.
They drank all the rum they had and keened until the
rest of the section thought they’d gone crazy. They sat
in the dark round the open moonlit window wrapped in
blankets and drinking warm zabaglione. Some Austrian
planes that had been droning overhead suddenly cut off
their motors and dumped a load of bombs right in front
of them. The antiaircraft guns had been barking for some
time and shrapnel sparkling in the moonhazy sky over-
head but they’d been too drunk to notice. One bomb fell
geflump into the Brenta and the others filled the space in
front of the window with red leaping glare and shook the
villa with three roaring snorts. Plaster fell from the ceiling.
They could hear the tiles skuttering down off the roof
 overhead.
    “Jesus, that was almost good night, said Summers.
 Steve started singing. Come away from that window^ my
 light and my life^ but the rest of them drowned it out with
 an out of tune Deutschland Deutschland Uher Alles, They
 suddenly all felt crazy drunk,
     Ed Schuyler was standing on a chair giving a recitation

 of the Erlkomg when Feldmann, the Swiss hotel-

 keeper’s son who was now head of the section, stuck his
 head in the door and asked what in the devil they thought

                                                                               ^01

639
they were doing.              better go down in the abris, one
of the Italian mechanics was killed and a soldier walking
up the road had his legs blown off ... no time for
monkeyshines.” They offered him a drink and he went off
in a rage. After that they drank marsala. Sometime in the
early dawn greyness Dick got up and staggered to the
                              it was raining pitchforks, the foaming
window to vomit j
rapids of the Brenta looked very white through the shim-
mering rain.
    Next day it was Dick^s and Stevens turn to go on post
to Rova, They drove out of the yard at six with then-
heads like fireballoons, damn glad to be away from the big
scandal there’d be at the section. At Rova the lines were
quiet, only a few pneumonia or venereal cases to evacuate,
and a couple of poor devils who’d shot themselves in the
                                                                                       but
foot and were to be sent to the hospital under guard j
at the officers’ mess where they ate things were ver}^ agi-
tated indeed. Tenente Sardmaglia was under arrest in his
quarters for saucing the Coronele and had been up there
for two days making up a little march on his mandolin
that he called the march of the medical colonels. Serrati
told them about it giggling behind his hand while they
were waiting for the other officers to come to mess. It was
all on account of the macchina for coffee. There were only
three macchine for the whole mess, one for the colonel,
one for the major, and the other went around to the
                                           well, one day last week they’d
junior officers in rotation 3
been kidding that bella ragazza, the niece of the farmer
                                                    she hadn’t let any of the
on whom they were quartered j
officers kiss her and had carried on like a crazy woman
when they pinched her behind, and the colonel had been
angry about it, and angrier yet when Sardmaglia had bet
him five lira that he could kiss her and he’d whispered
something in her ear and she’d let him and that had made
the colonel get purple in the face and he’d told the ordi-
nanza not to give the macchina to the tenente when his
         ao2

640
turn came round, and Sardinaglia had slapped the ordi-
nanza^s face and there’d been a row and as a result Sardi-
naglia was confined to his quarters and the Americans
would see what a circus it was. They all had to straighten
their faces in a hurry because the colonel and the major
and the two captains came jingling in at that moment.
   The ordinanza came and saluted, and said pronto
spaghetti in a cheerful tone, and everybody sat down. For
a while the officers were quiet sucking in the long oily
tomatocoated strings of spaghetti, the wine was passed
around and the colonel had just cleared his throat to begin
one of his funny stories that everybody had to laugh at,
when from up above there came the tinkle of a mandolin.
The colonel’s face got red and he put a forkful of spaghetti
in his mouth instead of saying anything. As it was Sunday
the meal was unusually long: at dessert the coffee macchina
was awarded to Dick as a courtesy to gli americani and
somebody produced a bottle of Strega. The colonel told the
ordinanza to tell the bella ragazza to come and have a
                                         he looked pretty sour at the idea,
glass of Strega with him j
                         but he went and got her. She turned out
Dick thought 5
to be a handsome stout oliveskinned countrygirl. Her
cheeks burning she went timidly up to the colonel and
said, thank you very much but please she never drank
strong drinks. The colonel grabbed her and made her sit
on his knee and tried to make her drink his glass of strega,
but she kept her handsome set of ivory teeth clenched and
wouldn’t drink it. It ended by several of the officers hold-
ing her and tickling her and the colonel pouring the strega
over her chin. Everybody roared with laughter except the
ordinanza, who turned white as chalk, and Steve and Dick
who didn’t know where to look. While the senior officers
were teasing and tickling her and running their hands into
her blouse, the junior officers were holding her feet and
running their hands up her legs. Finally the colonel got
control of his laughter enough to say, ^^Basta, now she

                                                                               203

641
must give me a kiss.” But the girl broke loose and ran out

of the room.
    ^^Go and bring her back,” the colonel said to the ordi-
nanza. After a moment the ordmanza came back and stood

at attention and said he couldn’t find her. “Good for him,”
whispered Steve to Dick. Dick noticed that the ordmanza’s
legs were trembling. “You can’t can’t you^” roared the
colonel, and gave the ordinanza a pushj one of the lieu-
tenants stuck his foot out and the ordinanza tripped over

it and fell. Everybody laughed and the colonel gave him a
kick^ he had gotten to his hands and knees when the
colonel gave him a kick in the seat of his pants that sent
him flat to the floor again. The officers all roared, the
ordinanza crawled to the door with the colonel running
after him giving him little kicks first on one side and then
on the other, like a soccerplayer with a football. That put
everybody in a good humor and they had another drink of
Strega all around. When they got outside Serrati, who’d
been laughing with the rest, grabbed Dick’s arm and hissed
in his ear, “Bestie,  . . . sono tutti bestie.”
   When the other ofiicers had gone, Serrati took them up
^o see Sardinaglia who was a tall longfaced young man who
liked to call himself a futurista. Serrati told him what had
happened and said he was afraid the Americans had been
disgusted. “A futurist must be disgusted at nothing except
weakness and stupidity,” said Sardinaglia sententiously.
Then he told them he’d found out who the bella ragazza
was really sleeping with . . « with the ordinanza. That he
                                it showed that women were all pigs.
said disgusted him 5
Then he said to sit down on his cot while he played them
the march of the medical colonels. They declared it was
fine. “A futurist must be strong and disgusted with noth-
ing,” he said, still trilling on the mandolin, “that’s why I
admire the Germans and American millionaires.” They
all laughed.
    Dick and Steve went out to pick up some feriti to evacu-
        204

642
ate to the hospital. Behind the barn where they parked the
cars, they found the ordmanza sitting on a stone with his
head in his hands, tears had made long streaks on the dirt
of his face. Steve went up to him and patted him on the
back and gave him a package of Mecca cigarettes, that had
been distributed to them by the Y.M.C.A. The ordmanza
squeezed Steve’s hand, looked as if he was going to kiss it.
He said after the war he was going to America where
people were civilized, not bestie like here. Dick asked him
where the girl had gone. ^^Gone away,” he said. ^^Andata
via.”
    When they got back to the section they found there was
hell to pay. Orders had come for Savage, Warner, Ripley
and Schuyler to report to the head office in Rome in order
to be sent back to the States. Feldmann wouldn’t tell them
what the trouble was. They noticed at once that the other
men in the section were looking at them suspiciously and
were nervous about speaking to them, except for Fred
Summers who said he didn’t understand it, the whole frig-
ging business was a madhouse anyway. Sheldrake, who’d
moved his dufflebag and cot into another room in the villa,
came around with an I told you so air and said he’d heard
the words seditious utterances and that an Italian intelli-
gence officer had been around asking about them. He
wished them good luck and said it was too bad. They left
the section without saying goodby to anybody. Feldmann
drove them and their dufflebags and bedrolls down to
Vicenza in the camlonette. At the railroad station he handed
them their orders of movement to Rome, said it was too
bad, wished them good luck, and went off in a hurry
without shaking hands.
    ^^The sons of bitches,” growled Steve, ^^you might think
we had leprosy.” Ed Schuyler was reading the military

passes, his face beaming. ^^Men and brethren,” he said, “I
am moved to make a speech . . . this is the greatest graft
yet , . , do you gentlemen realize that what’s happening

                                                                              205

643
IS that the Red Cross, otherwise known as the goose that

[ays the golden egg, is presenting us with a free tour of
Italy ^ We don^t have to get to Rome for a year.’’ ^^Keep
out of Rome till the revolution,” suggested Dick. ^^Enter
Rome with the Austrians,” said Ripley.
   A train came into the station. They piled into a first

class compartment, when the conductor came and tried

to explain that their orders read for second class trans-
portation, they couldn’t understand Italian, so finally he
left them there. At Verona they piled off to check their
dufflebags and cots to Rome. It was suppertime so they
decided to walk around the town and spend the night. In
the morning they went to see the ancient theatre and the
great peachcolored marble church of San Zeno. Then they
sat around the cafe at the station until a tram came by for
Rome. The train was jampacked with officers in pale blue
                                     by Bologna they’d gotten tired of
and pale green cloaks 3
sitting on the floor of the vestibule and decided they must
see the leaning towers. Then they went to Pistoja, Lucca,
Pisa and back to the main line at Florence. When the con-
ductors shook their heads over the orders of movement
they explained that they’d been misinformed and due to
ignorance of the language had taken the wrong tram. At
Florence, where it was rainy and cold and the buildings all
looked like the replicas of them they’d seen at home, the
station master put them forcibly on the express for Rome,
but they sneaked out the other side after it had started
and got into the local for Assisi. From there they got to
Siena by way of San Gimignano, as full of towers as New
York, in a hack they hired for the day, and ended up one
fine spring morning full up to the neck with painting and
architecture and oil and garlic and scenery, looking at
the Signorelli frescoes in the cathedral at Orvieto. They
stayed there all day looking at the great fresco of the Last
Judgment, drinking the magnificent wine and basking in
the sunny square outside. When they got to Rome, to the
        206

644
station next to the baths of Diocletian^ they felt pretty bad
                                                                they were amazed
at the prospect of giving up their passes 3
when the employee merely stamped them and gave them
back, saying, ^Ter il ntornod^
    They went to a hotel and cleaned up, and then pooling
the last of their money went on a big bust with a high-
class meal, Frascati wine and asti for dessert, a vaudeville
show and a cabaret on the Via Roma where they met an
American girl they called the baroness who promised to
show them the town. By the end of the evening nobody
had enough money left to go home with the baroness or
any of her charming ladyfnends, so they hired a cab with
their last ten lire to take them out to see the Colosseum by
moonlight. The great masses of rums, the engraved stones,
the names, the stately Roman names, the old cabdriver
with his oilcloth stovepipe hat and his green soupstrainers
recommending whorehouses under the last quarter of the
ruined moon, the great masses of masonry full of archer
and columns piled up everywhere into the night, the boom
of the word Rome dying away in pompous chords into the
past, sent them to bed with their heads whirling, Rome
throbbing in their ears so that they could not sleep.
    Next morning Dick got up while the others were still
                                                                                         he
dead to the world and went round to the Red Cross ^
was suddenly nervous and worried so that he couldn’t eat
his breakfast. At the office he saw a stoutish Bostonian
Major who seemed to be running things, and asked him
straight out what the devil the trouble was. The Major
hemmed and hawed and kept the conversation in an agree-
able tone, as one Harvard man to another. He talked
about indiscretions and the oversensitiveness of the Italians.
As a matter of fact the censor didn’t like the tone of certain
letters, etcetera, etcetera. Dick said he felt he ought to ex-
plain his position, and that if the Red Cross felt he hadn’t
done his duty they ought to give him a courtmartial, he
said he felt there were many men in his position who had

                                                                              207

645
pacifist views but now that the country was at war were

willing to do any kind of work they could to help, but that

didn^t mean he believed in the war, he felt he ought to be
allowed to explain his position. The major said Ah well he
quite understood, etcetera, etcetera, but that the young
should realize the importance of discretion, etcetera, et-

cetera, and that the whole thing had been satisfactorily
                                               as a matter of fact the inci-
explained as an indiscretion j
dent was closed. Dick kept saying, he ought to be allowed
to explain his position, and the major kept saying the inci-
dent was closed, etcetera, etcetera, until it all seemed a little

silly and he left the office. The major promised him trans-
portation to Paris if he wanted to take it up with the office

there. Dick went back to the hotel feeling baffled and sore.
   The other two had gone out, so he and Steve walked
around the town, looking at the sunny streets, that smelt of
frying oliveoil and wine and old stones, and the domed
baroque churches and the columns and the Pantheon and
the Tiber. They didn’t have a cent in their pockets to buy
lunch or a drink with. They spent the afternoon hungry,
napping glumly on the warm sod of the Pincian, and got
back to the room famished and depressed to find Schuyler
and Ripley drinking vermouth and soda and in high spirits.
Schuyler had run into an old friend of his father’s. Colonel
Anderson, who was on a mission investigating the Red
Cross, and had poured out his woes and given him dope
about small graft at the office in Milan. Major Anderson
had set him up to lunch and highballs at the Hotel de
Russie, lent him a hundred dollars and fixed him up with
a job in the publicity department. ^^So men and brethren,
ewiva Italia and the goddamned Alleati, we’re all set.’’
^What about the dossier?” Steve asked savagely. “Aw
forget it, siamo tutti Italian! . . . who’s a defeatist now?”
    Schuyler set them all up to meals, took them out to
Tivoli and the Lake of Nemi in a st iff car, and finally put
         208

646
them on the train to Pari$ with the rating of captain on
their transport orders.
   The first day in Paris Steve went off to the Red Cross
office to get shipped home. ^To hell with it, Pm going to
C.O./^ was all he’d say. Ripley enlisted in the French
artillery school at Fontainebleau. Dick got himself a cheap
room in a little hotel on the He St. Louis and spent his
days interviewing first one higher up and then another m
                          Hiram Halsey Cooper had suggested the
the Red Cross j
names in a very guarded reply to a cable Dick sent him
from Rome. The higherups sent him from one to the
other. “Young man,” said one baldheaded official in a
luxurious office at the Hotel Crillon, “your opinions, while
showmg a senseless and cowardly turn of mind, don’t
matter. The American people is out to get the kaiser. We
are bending every nerve and every energy towards that
end^ anybody who gets in the way of the great machine
the energy and devotion of a hundred million patriots is
building towards the stainless purpose of saving civiliza-
tion from the Huns will be mashed like a fly. Pm surprised
that a collegebred man like you hasn’t more sense. Don’t
monkey with the buzzsaw.”
    Finally he was sent to the army intelligence service
where he found a young fellow named Spaulding he’d
known in college who greeted him with a queazy smile.
“Old man,” he said, “in a time like this we can’t give in
to our personal feelings can we . . . ? I think it’s per-
fectly criminal to allow yourself the luxury of private
opinions, perfectly criminal. It’s war time and we’ve all got
to do our duty, it’s people like you that are encouraging
the Germans to keep up the fight, people like you and the
Russians.” Spaulding’s boss was a captain and wore spurs
                                                           he was a sternlooking
and magnificently polished puttees 5
young man with a delicate profile. He strode up to Dick,
put his face close to his and yelled, “What would you do

if two Huns attacked your sister? You’d fight, wouldn’t

                                                                              209

647
you? ... if you’re not a dirty yellow dawg. .            . Dick
tried to point out that he was anxious to keep on doing the
work he had been doing, he was trying to get back to the
front with the Red Cross, he wanted an opportunity to ex-
plain his position. The captain strode up and down, bawling
him out, yelling that any man who was still a pacifist after
the President’s declaration of war was a moron or what
was worse a degenerate and that they didn’t want people
like that in the A.E.F. and that he was going to see to

it that Dick would be sent back to the States and that he
would not be allowed to come back in any capacity what-
soever. ^^The A.E.F. is no place for a slacker.”
    Dick gave up and went to the Red Cross ojEce to get his
transportation; they gave him an order for the Tourmne
sailing from Bordeaux in two weeks. His last two weeks in
Paris he spent working as a volunteer stretcherbearer at
the American hospital on the Avenue du Bois de Boulogne.
It was June. There were airraids every clear night and
when the wind was right you could hear the guns on the
front. The German oiEensive was on, the lines were so
near Paris the ambulances were evacuating wounded
directly on the basehospitals. All night the stretcher cases
would spread along the broad pavements under the trees
m fresh leaf In front of the hospital, Dick would help carry
them up the marble stairs into the reception room. One
night they put him on duty outside the operating room and
for twelve hours he had the job of carrying out buckets of
blood and gauze from which protruded occasionally a
shattered bone or a piece of an arm or a leg. When he went
off duty he’d walk home achingly tired through the straw-
berryscented early Parisian morning, thinking of the faces
and the eyes and the sweatdrenched hair and the clenched
€ngers clotted with blood and dirt and the fellows kidding
and pleading for cigarettes and the bubbling groans of the
lung cases.
    One day he saw a pocket compass in a jeweller’s win-
         210

648
dow on the Rue de Rivoli. He went in and bought it;
there was suddenly a fullformed plan in his head to buy a
civilian suit, leave his uniform in a heap on the wharf at
Bordeaux and make for the Spanish border. With luck and
all the old transport orders he had in his inside pocket he
was sure he could make it; hop across the border and then,
once in a country free from nightmare, decide what to do.
He even got ready a letter to send his mother.
    All the time he was packing his books and other junk
in his dufflebag and carrying it on his back up the quais to
the Gare d’Orleans, Swinburne’s Song in Time of Order
kept going through his head:

                    While three men hold together
                    The kingdoms are less by three.

    By gum, he must write some verse, what people needed
was stirring poems to nerve them for revolt against their
cannibal governments. Sitting in the secondclass compart-
ment he was so busy building a daydream of himself living
in a sunscorched Spanish town, sending out flaming poems
and manifestoes, calling young men to revolt against their
 butchers, poems that would be published by secret presses

all over the world, that he hardly saw the suburbs of Paris
 or the bluegreen summer farmlands sliding by.

        het our flag run out straight in the wind
             The old red shall be floated again
         When the ranks that are thin shall be thinned
            When the names that were twenty are ten

     Even the rumblebump rumblebump of the French rail-
 road train seemed to be chanting as if the words were mut-
 tered low in unison by a marching crowd:

                    While three men hold together
                     The kingdoms are less by three.

649
   At noon Dick got hungry and went to the diner to

eat a last deluxe meal. He sat down at a table opposite a
goodlooking young man in a French officer’s uniform.
“Good Godj Nedj is that you?” Blake Wigglesworth
threw back his head in the funny way he had and laughed
“Gargon,” he shouted^ “un verre pour le monsieur.”
   “But how long were you in the Lafayette Escadrille?”
stammered Dick.
   “Not long . . . they wouldn’t have me.”
   “And how about the Navy?”
   “Threw me out too, the damn fools think I’ve got T.B.
        gargon, une bouteille de champagne. .      . . Where
. .  .
are you going
   “I’ll explain.”
   “Well^ I’m going home on the TouraineP Ned threw
back his head laughing again and his lips formed the syl-
lables blahblahblahblah. Dick noticed that although his
face was very pale and thin his skin under his eyes and up
onto the temples was flushed and his eyes looked a little
too bright, “Well, so am I,” he heard himself say.
   “I got into hot water,” said Ned.
   “Me too,” said Dick. “Very.”
   They lifted their glasses and looked into each other’s
eyes and laughed. They sat in the diner all afternoon talk-
ing and drinking and got to Bordeaux boiled as owls, Ned
had spent all his money in Paris and Dick had very little
left, so they had to sell their bedrolls and equipment to a
couple of American lieutenants just arrived they met in
the Cafe de Bordeaux. It was almost like old days in
Boston going around from bar to bar and looking for
places to get drinks after closing. They spent most of the
night in an elegant maison publique all upholstered in
pink satin, talking to the madam, a driedup woman with
a long upper lip like a llama’s wearing a black spangled
evening dress, who took a fancy to them and made them
stay and eat onion soup with her. They were so busy
        212

650
talking they forgot about the girls. She’d been in the
Transvaal during the Boer War and spoke a curious
brand of South African English. “Vous comprennez ve
had very fine clientele, every man jack officers, very much
                                                                                        get
elegance, decorum. These johnnies off the veldt .   . .
the hell outen here  . , , bloody select don’t you know. Ve
had two salons, one salon English officers, one salon Boer
officers, very select, never in all the war make any bloody
row, no fight.     . . .Vos compatriotes les Americains ce
n’est pas comme ga, mes amis. Beaucoup sonofabeetch,
make drunk, make bloody row, make sick, naturellement

il y a aussi des gentils gargons comme vous, mes mignons,
des veritables gentlemens,” and she patted them both on
the cheeks with her horny ringed hands. When they left
she wanted to kiss them and went with them to the door
saying, ^^Bonsoir mes jolis petits gentlemens.”
    All the crossing they were never sober after eleven in
                                                                     they were very
the mornings it was calm misty weather j
happy. One night when he was standing alone in the stern
beside the small gun, Dick was searching his pocket for a
cigarette when his fingers felt something hard in the lining
of his coat. It was the little compass he had bought to
 help him across the Spanish border. Guiltily, he fished it

out and dropped it overboard.



                                             NEWSREEL XXVII


 HER WOUNDED HERO OF WAR A FRAUD
                          SAYS WIFE IN SUIT

                        Mid the wars great coise
                            Stands the red cross noise
                        She^s the rose of no man^s land
                                                                               ai3

651
        according to the thousands who had assembled to see the
launching and were eyewitnesses of the disaster the scaffold
simply seemed to turn over like a gigantic turtle precipitating

Its occupants into twentyfive feet of water. This was exactly
four minutes before the launching was scheduled

                     Oh that battle of Parse

                         It^s making a bum out of me

BRITISH BEGIN OPERATION ON AFGHAN
                                      FRONTIER

        the leading part in world trade which the U.S. is now
confidently expected to take, will depend to a very great extent
upon the intelligence and success with which its harbors are
utilized and developed

            I wanta go home I wanta go home
            The bullets they whistle the cannons they roar
            I dont want to go to the trenches no more
            Oh shlf me over the sea
             Where the Allemand cant get at me

        you have begun a crusade against toys, but if all the
German toys were commandeered and destroyed the end of
German importations would not yet have been reached

             HOLDS UP 20 DINERS IN CAFE

LAWHATING GATHERINGS NOT TO BE ALLOWED IN
         CRITICAL TIME THREATENING SOCIAL UPHEAVAL
                         Oh my Pm too young to die
                             I wanta go home

                   Nancy Enjoys Nightlife Despite Raids

TATTOOED WOMAN SOUGHT BY POLICE IN
                              TRUNK MURDER
           ARMY WIFE SLASHED BY ADMIRER
         214

652
        Young Man Alleged to Have Taken Money to Aid m
Promotion of a Reserve Officer. It appears that these men
were Chinese merchants from Irkutsk, Chita and elsewhere
who were proceeding homeward to Harbin carrying theit
profits for investment in new stocks

                          Oh that battle of Paree
                              Its making a hum out of me
                          Toujours la femme et comblen

        300,000 RUSSIAN NOBLES SLAIN BY
                                     BOLSHEVIKI

       Bankers of This Country, Britain and France to
                         Safeguard Foreign Investors

         these three girls came to France thirteen months ago and
were the first concertparty to entertain at the front. They
staged a show for the American troops from a flatcar base of
a large naval gun three kilometers behind the line on the day
of the evening of the drive at Chateau Thierry. After that
they were assigned to the Aix-les-Bains leave area where they
acted during the day as canteen girls and entertained and
danced at night

              You never knew a flace that was so short of men
                  Beaucouf rum beaucouf fun
                      Mothered never know her loving son
              Oh if you want to see           that statue of Libertee
                  Keef away from that battle of Paree



                                  THE CAMERA EYE (35)


         there were always two cats the color of hot milk with

 a little coffee in it with aquamarine eyes and sootblack

 faces in the window of the laundry opposite the little

 creamery where we ate breakfast on the Montagne St*

                                                                                        215

653
Genevieve huddled between the old squeezedup slate-

grey houses of the Latin Quarter leaning over steep small

streets cosy under the fog       minute streets lit with dif-

ferentcolored chalks cluttered with infinitesimal bars res-

taurants paintshops and old prints beds bidets faded per-

fumery microscopic sizzle of frying butter

       the Bertha made a snapping noise no louder than a

tannoncracker near the hotel where Oscar Wilde died we

all ran up stairs to see if the house was on fire but the old

Woman whose lard was burning was sore as a crutch

       all the big new quarters near the Arc de Triomphe

were deserted but in the dogeared yellowbacked Paris of

the Carmagnole the Faubourg St Antoine the Commune
we were singing

                   ^suis dans Vaxe

                       ^suis dans Vaxe

                           ^suis dans Vaxe du gros canon

        when the Bertha dropped in the Seine there was a

concours de peche in the little brightgreen skiffs among all

the old whiskery fishermen scooping up in nets the minnows

the concussion had stunned



                                    EVELINE HUTCHINS


    Eveline went to live with Eleanor in a fine apartment
Eleanor had gotten hold of somehow on the quai de la

654
Tournelle. It was the mansard floor of a grey peeling’*
faced house built at the time of Richelieu and done over
under Louis Quinze. Eveline never tired of looking out the
window^ through the delicate tracing of the wroughtiron
balcony, at the Seme where toy steamboats bucked the cur-
rent, towing shinyvarnished barges that had lace curtains
and geraniums in the windows of their deckhouses painted
green and red, and at the island opposite where the rock-
eting curves of the flying buttresses shoved the apse of
Notre Dame dizzily upwards out of the trees of a little
park. They had tea at a small Buhl table in the window
almost every evening when they got home from the office
on the Rue de Rivoli, after spending the day pasting pic-
tures of ruined French farms and orphaned children and
starving warbabies into scrapbooks to be sent home for use
in Red Cross drives.
    After tea she’d go out in the kitchen and watch Yvonne
cook. With the groceries and sugar they drew at the Red
Cross commissary, Yvonne operated a system of barter so
that their food hardly cost them anything. At first Eveline
tried to stop her but she’d answer with a torrent of argu-
ment: did Mademoiselle think that President Poincare or
the generals or the cabinet ministers, ces salots de prof-
iteurs, ces salots d’embusques, went without their brioches?

It was the systeme D, ils s’en fichent des particuliers, des
pauvres gens . . . very well her ladies would eat as well
as any old camels of generals, if she had her way she’d
have all the generals line up before a firingsquad and the
embusque ministers and the ronds de cuir too. Eleanor said
her sufferings had made the old woman a little cracked but
Jerry Burnham said it was the rest of the world that was
cracked.
    Jerry Burnham was the little redfaced man who’d been
such a help with the colonel the first night Eveline got to
Paris. They often laughed about it afterwards. He was
working for the U.P. and appeared every few days in her

                                                                              217

655
office on his rounds covering Red Cross activities. He knew
all the Paris restaurants and would take Eveline out to
dinner at the Tour d’Argent or to lunch at the Taverne
Nicholas Flamel and they’d walk around the old streets of
the Marais afternoons and get late to their work together.
When they’d settle in the evening at a good quiet table in
a cafe where they couldn’t be overheard (all the waiters
were spies he said), he’d drink a lot of cognac and soda and
pour out his feelings, how his work disgusted him, how a
correspondent couldn’t get to see anything anymore, how
he had three or four censorships on his neck all the time
and had to send out prepared stuff that was all a pack of
dirty lies every word of it, how a man lost his self-
respect doing things like that year after year, how a news-
paperman had been little better than a skunk before the
war, but that now there wasn’t anything low enough you
could call him. Eveline would try to cheer him up telling
him that when the war was over he ought to write a book
like Le Feu and really tell the truth about it. ^^But the
war won’t ever be over ... too damn profitable, do you
get me? Back home they’re coining money, the British are
coining moneys even the French, look at Bordeaux and
Toulouse and Marseilles coining money and the goddam
politicians, all of ’em got bank accounts in Amsterdam or
Barcelona, the sons of bitches.” Then he’d take her hand
and get a crying jag and promise that if it did end he’d
get back his selfrespect and write the great novel he felt he
had in him.
    Late that fall Eveline came home one evening tramp-
ing through the mud and the foggy dusk to find that
Eleanor had a French soldier to tea. She was glad to see
him, because she was always complaining that she wasn’t
getting to know any French people, nothing but profes-
sional relievers and Red Cross women who were just too
                but it was some
tiresome j                           moments before she realized it
was Maurice Millet. She wondered how she could have
         218

656
fallen for him even when she was a kid, he looked so
middleaged and pasty and oldmaldish in his stained blue
uniform. His large eyes with their girlish long lashes had
heavy violet rings under them. Eleanor evidently thought
he was wonderful still, and drank up his talk about Pelan
supreme du sacrifice and Pharmonie mysterieuse de la
mort. He was a stretcherbearer in a basehospital at Nancy,
had become very religious and had almost forgotten his
English. When they asked him about his painting he
shrugged his shoulders and wouldn’t answer. At supper
he ate very little and drank only water. He stayed till late
in the evening telling them about miraculous conversions
of unbelievers, extreme unction on the firing line, a vision
of the young Christ he’d seen walking among the wounded
in a dressingstatlon during a gasattack. Apres la guerre he
was going into a monastery. Trappist perhaps. After he
left Eleanor said it had been the most inspiring evening
                                            Eveline didn’t argue with her.
she’d ever had in her life 5
    Maurice came back one other afternoon before his perme
 expired bringing a young writer who was working at the
 Quai d’Orsay, a tall young Frenchman with pink cheeks
 who looked like an English publicschool boy, whose name
 was Raoul Lemonnier. He seemed to prefer to speak
 English than French. He’d been at the front for two years
 in the Chasseurs Alpins and had been reforme on account
 of his lungs or his uncle who was a minister he couldn’t
 say which. It was all very boring, he said. He thought
 tennis was ripping, though, and went out to St. Cloud to
 row every afternoon. Eleanor discovered that what she’d
 been wanting all fall had been a game of tennis. He said
 he liked English and American women because they liked
 sport. Here every woman thought you wanted to go to
 bed with her right awayj “Love is very boring,” he said.
 He and Eveline stood in the window talking about cock-

 tails (he adored Amencan drinks) and looked out at the

 last purple shreds of dusk settling over Notre Dame and

                                                                                219

657
the SeinCj while Eleanor and Maurice sat in the dark in
the little salon talking about St. Francis of Assisi. She asked
him to dinner.
    The next morning Eleanor said she thought she was
going to become a Catholic. On their way to the office she
made Eveline stop into Notre Dame with her to hear
mass and they both lit candles for Maurice^s safety at the
front before what Eveline thought was a just too tiresome-
looking virgin near the main door. But it was impressive

all the same, the priests moaning and the lights and the
smell of chilled incense. She certainly jioped poor Maurice
wouldn’t be killed.
    For dinner that night Eveline invited Jerry Burnham,
Miss Felton who was back from Amiens and Major
Appleton who was in Paris doing something about tanks.
It was a fine dinner, duck roasted with oranges, although
Jerry, who was sore about how much Eveline talked to
Lemonnier, had to get drunk and use a lot of bad language
and tell about the retreat at Caporetto and say that the
Allies were in a bad way. Major Appleton said he
oughtn’t to say it even if it was true and got quite red in
the face. Eleanor was pretty indignant and said he ought
to be arrested for making such a statement, and after
everybody had left she and Eveline had quite a quarrel.
^^What will that young Frenchman be thinking of us^^
You’re a darling, Eveline dear, but you have the vulgarest
friends. I don’t know where you pick them up, and that
Felton woman drank four cocktails, a quart of beaujolais
and three cognacs, I kept tabs on her myself 5” Eveline
started to laugh and they both got to laughing. But
Eleanor said that their life was getting much too bohe-
mian and that it wasn’t right with the war on and things
going so dreadfully in Italy and Russia and the poor boys
in the trenches and all that.
    That winter Paris gradually filled up with Americans
in uniform, and staffcars, and groceries from the Red
        220

658
                               and Major
Cross supply store j                  Moorehouse who, it turned
out, was an old friend of Eleanor’s, arrived straight from
Washington to take charge of the Red Cross publicity.
Everybody was talking about him before he came because
he’d been one of the best known publicity experts m New
York before the war. There was no one who hadn’t heard
        Ward Moorehouse. There was a lot of scurry around
of J.
the office when word came around that he’d actually
landed in Brest and everybody was nervous worrying
where the axe was going to fall.
    The morning he arrived the first thing Eveline noticed
was that Eleanor had had her hair curled. Then just be-
fore noon the whole publicity department was asked into
Major Wood’s office to meet Major Moorehouse. He was
a biggish man with blue eyes and hair so light it was
almost white. His uniform fitted well and his Sam Browne
belt and his puttees shone like glass. Eveline thought at
once that there was something sincere and appealing about
him, like about her father, that she liked. He looked
young too, in spite of the thick jowl, and he had a slight
southern accent when he talked. He made a httle speech
about the importance of the work the Red Cross was
doing to keep up the morale of civilians and combatants,
and that their publicity ought to have two aims, to stimu-
late giving among the folks back home and to keep people
informed of the progress of the work. The trouble now
was that people didn’t know enough about what a valuable
effort the Red Cross workers were making and were too
prone to listen to the criticisms of proGermans working
under the mask of pacifism and knockers and slackers
                                                         and that the American
always ready to carp and criticize j
people and the warwracked populations of the Allied coun-

tries must be made to know the splendid sacrifice the Red
Cross workers were making, as splendid in its way as the

 sacrifice of the dear boys in the trenches.
     “Even at this moment, my friends, we are under firci

                                                                               221

659
ready to make the supreme sacrifice that civilization shall
not perish from the earth.” Major Wood leaned back in

his swivelchair and it let out a squeak that made everybody
look up with a start and several people looked out of the
window as if they expected to see a shell from big Bertha
hurtling right in on them. ^^You see,” said Major Moore-
house eagerly, his blue eyes snapping, “that is what we
must make people feel , . . the catch in the throat, the
wrench to steady the nerves, the determination to carry
on.”
    Eveline felt stirred in spite of herself. She looked a
quick sideways look at Eleanor, who looked cool and lily-

tike as she had when she was listening to Maurice tell
about the young Christ of the gasattack. Can’t ever tell
what she’s thinking, though, said Eveline to herself.
   That afternoon when J. W., as Eleanor called Major
Moorehouse, came down to have a cup of tea with them,
Eveline felt that she was being narrowly watched and
minded her P’s and Q’s as well as she could, it is the
                             she was giggling about it inside. He
financial adviser 3
looked a little haggard and didn’t say much, and winced
noticeably when they talked about airraids moonlight
nights, and how President Poincare went around in per-
son every morning to visit the ruins and condole with the
survivors. He didn’t stay long and went off someplace in
a slaffcar to confer with some high official or other.
Eveline thought he looked nervous and uneasy and would
rather have stayed with them. Eleanor went out on the
landing of the stairs with him and was gone some time.
Eveline watched her narrowly when she came back into
the room but her face had its accustomed look of finely
chiselled calm. It was on the tip of Eveline’s tongue to
ask her if Major Moorehouse was her .    . . her -     . . but
she couldn’t think of a way of putting it.
    Eleanor didn’t say anything for some timej then she
shook her head and said, “Poor Gertrude.” ^Who’s that?”
         222

660
Eleanor^s voice was just a shade tinny, “J. W.^s wife . , .
she^s in a sanitarium with a nervous breakdown ... the
strain, darling, this terrible war.’^
    Major Moorehouse went down to Italy to reorganize
the publicity of the American Red Cross there, and a
couple of weeks later Eleanor got orders from Washing-
ton to join the Rome ofSce. That left Eveline alone with
Yvonne in the apartment.
    It was a chilly, lonely winter and working with all these
relievers was just too tiresome, but Eveline managed to
hold her job and to have some fun sometimes m the eve-
ning with Raoul, who would come around and take her
out to some petite boite or other that he^d always say was
very boring. He took her to the Noctambules where you
                                                                               or up to
could sometimes get drinks after the legal hour 5
a little restaurant on the Butte of Montmartre where one
cold moonlit January night they stood on the porch of
the Sacre Coeur and saw the Zeppelins come over. Paris
stretched out cold and dead as if all the tiers of roofs
and domes were carved out of snow and the shrapnel
sparkled frostily overhead and the searchlights were an-
tennae of great insects moving through the milky dark-
ness. At intervals came red snorting flares of the incen-
diary bombs. Just once they caught sight of two tiny

silver cigars overhead. They looked higher than the moon.
    Eveline found that RaouPs arm that had been around
her waist had slipped up and that he had his hand over
her breast. ^‘^C’est fou tu sais . . . c’est fou tu sais,” he
was saying in a singsong voice, he seemed to have forgot-
ten his English. After that they talked French and Eveline
thought she loved him terribly much. After the breloque
 had gone through the streets they walked home across
dark silent Paris. At one corner a gendarme came up and
 asked Lemonnier for his papers. He read them through
 painfully in the faint blue glow of a corner light, while
 Eveline stood % by breathless, feeling her heart pound. Th^

                                                                               223

661
gendarme handed back the papers, saluted, apologized
profusely and walked off. Neither of them said anything
about It, but Raoul seemed to be taking it for granted he
was going to sleep with her at her apartment. They walked
home briskly through the cold black streets, their foot-
steps clacking sharply on the cobbles. She hung on his
arm, there was something tight and electric and uncom-
fortable in the way their hips occasionally touched as they
walked.
   Her house was one of the few in Paris that didn^t have
a concierge. She unlocked the door and they climbed shiv-
ering together up the cold stone stairs. She whispered to
him to be quiet, because of her maid. ^Tt is very boring,”
                        his lips brushed warm against her ear. “I
he whispered 3
hope you won^t think ids too boring.”
   While he was combing his hair at her dressingtable,
taking little connoisseur’s sniffs at her bottles of perfume,
preening himself in the mirror without haste and embar-
rassment, he said, ^^Charmante Eveline, would you like
to be my wife? It could be arranged, don’t you know. My
uncle who is the head of the family is very fond of Ameri-
cans. Of course it would be very boring, the contract and
all that.” ^^Oh, no, that wouldn’t be my idea at all,” she
whispered giggling and shivering from the bed. Raoul
gave her a furious offended look, said good night very
formally and left.
   When the trees began to bud outside her window and
the flowerwomen in the markets began to sell narcissuses
and daffodils, the feeling that it was spring made her long
months alone in Paris seem drearier than ever. Jerry
                                                        Raoul Lemonnier had
Burnham had gone to Palestine 3
                                                  whenever he was in town
never come to see her again 3
Major A.ppleton came around and paid her rather elab-
orate attentions, but he was just too tiresome. Eliza Felton
was driving an ambulance attached to a U. S. basehospital
m the Avenue du Bois de Boulogne and would come
         224

662
around those Sundays when she was oif duty and make
Eveline’s life miserable with her complaints that Evelme
was not the free pagan soul she’d thought at first. She said
that nobody loved her and that she was praying for the
Bertha with her number on it that would end it all. It
got so bad that Eveline wasn’t able to stay in the house at
all on Sunday and often spent the afternoon in her office
reading Anatole France.
   Then Yvonne’s crotchets were pretty tryingj she tried
to run Eveline’s life with her tightlipped comments.
When Don Stevens turned up for a leave, looking more
haggard than ever in the grey uniform of the Quaker out-

fit, it was a godsend, and Eveline decided maybe she’d
been in love with him after all. She told Yvonne he was
her cousin and that they’d been brought up like brother
and sister and put him up m Eleanor’s room.
    Don was in a tremendous state of excitement about the
success of the Bolsheviki in Russia, ate enormously, drank
all the wine in the house, and was full of mysterious ref-
erences to underground forces he was in touch with. He
said all the armies were mutinous and that what had hap-
pened at Caporetto would happen on the whole front, the
German soldiers were ready for revolt too and that would
be the beginning of the world revolution. He told her
about the mutinies at Verdun, about long trainloads of sol-
diers he’d seen going up to an attack crying, “A bas la
guerre,” and shooting at the gendarmes as they went.
    “Eveline, we’re on the edge of gigantic events. . . .
The working classes of the world won’t stand for this
nonsense any longer . . . damn it, the war will have
been almost worth while if we get a new socialist civiliza-

tion out of it.” He leaned across the table and kissed her
right under the thin nose of Yvonne who was bringing in
pancakes with burning brandy on them. He wagged his

finger at Yvonne and almost got a smile out of her by the
way he said, “Apres la guerre finie.”

                                                                              225

663
   That spring and summer things certainly did seenj
shaky, almost as i£ Don were right. At night she could
hear the gigantic surf of the guns in continuous barrage on
the crumpling front. The ofEce was full of crazy rumors:
the British Fifth army had turned and run, the Canadians
had mutinied and seized Amiens, spies were disabling all
the American planes, the Austrians were breaking through
in Italy again. Three times the Red Cross ofSce had or-
ders to pack up their records and be ready to move out of
Paris. In the face of all that it was hard for the publicity
department to keep up the proper cheerful attitude in
their releases, but Paris kept on filling up reassuringly
with American faces, American M.P.s, Sam Browne belts
and canned goods, and in July Major Moorehouse, who
had just arnved back from the States, came into the office
with a firsthand account of Chateau Thierry and announced
that the war would be over in a year.
    The same evening he asked Eveline to dine with him at
the Cafe de la Paix and to do it she broke a date she
had with Jerry Burnham who had gotten back from the
Near East and the Balkans and was full of stones of
cholera and calamity. J.W. ordered a magnificent dinner,
he said Eleanor had told him to see if Eveline didn’t need
a little cheering up. He talked about the gigantic era of
expansion that would dawn for America after the war.
America the good Samaritan healing the wounds of war-
torn Europe. It was as if he was rehearsing a speech, when
he got to the end of it he looked at Eveline with a funny
deprecatory smile and said, ^^And the joke of it is, it’s
true,” and Eveline laughed and suddenly found that she
liked J.W. very much indeed.
    She had on a new dress she’d bought at Paquin’s with
some money her father had sent her for her birthday,
and it was a relief after the uniform. They were through
eating before they had really gotten started talking.
Eveline wanted to try to get him to talk about himself.
         226

664
After dinner they went to Maximus, but that was full up
with brawling drunken aviators, and the rumpus seemed
to scare J.W. so that Eveline suggested to him that they
go down to her place and have a glass of wine. When they
got to the quai de la Tournelle, just as they were stepping
out of J.W.’s staffcar she caught sight of Don Stevens
walking down the street. For a second she hoped he
wouldn’t see them, but he turned around and ran back.
He had a young fellow with him in a private’s uniform
whose name was Johnson. They all went up and sat
around glumly in her parlor. She and J.W. couldn’t seem
to talk about anything but Eleanor, and the other two sat
glumly in their chairs looking embarrassed until J.W.
got to his feet, went down to his staffcar, and left.
    ^^God damn it, if there’s anything I hate it’s a Cross
Red Major,” broke out Don as soon as the door closed
behind J.W.
    Eveline was angry. “Well, it’s no worse than being a
fake Quaker,” she said icily.
    “You must forgive our intruding, Miss Hutchins,’'
mumbled the doughboy who had a blonde Swedish look.
    “We wanted to get you to come out to a cafe or some-
thing, but it’s too late now,” started Don crossly. The
doughboy interrupted him, “I hope, Miss Hutchins, you
don’t mind our intruding, I mean my intruding ... I
begged Don to bring me along. He’s talked so much
about you and it’s a year since I’ve seen a real nice Amer-
ican girl.”
    He had a deferential way of talking and a whiny Min-
nesota accent that Eveline hated at first, but by the time
he excused himself and left she liked him and stood up

for him when Don said, “He’s an awful sweet guy but

there’s something sappy about him. I was afraid you
wouldn’t like him.” She wouldn’t let Don spend the night

with her as he’d expected and he went away looking very

sullen.

                                                                               2127

665
     In October Eleanor came back with a lot of antique

 Italian painted panels she’d picked up for a song. In the
 Red Cross olEce there were more people than were needed
 for the work and she and Eleanor and J.W. took a tour of
the Red Cross canteens in the east of France in a staffcar.

 It was a wonderful trip, the weather was good for a won-
der, almost like American October, they had lunch and
dinner at regimental headquarters and army corps head-
 quarters and divisional headquarters everywhere, and all
the young olEcers were so nice to them, and J.W. was in
'such a good humor and kept them laughing all the time,
and they saw field batteries firing and an airplane duel
 and sausage balloons and heard the shriek of an arrive.
 It was during that trip that Eveline began to notice for
 the first time something cool in Eleanor’s manner that
 hurt herj they’d been such good friends the first week
 Eleanor had gotten back from Rome.
     Back in Paris it suddenly got very exciting, so many
 people they knew turned up, Eveline’s brother George
 who was an interpreter at the headquarters of the S.O.S.
 and a Mr. Robbins, a friend of J.W.’s who was always
 drunk and had a very funny way of talking and Jerry
 Burnham and a lot of newspaper men and Major Apple-
 ton who was now a Colonel. They had little dinners and
 parties and the main difficulty was sorting out ranks and
 getting hold of people who mixed properly. Fortunately
 their friends were all officers or correspondents who ranked
 as officers. Only once Don Stevens turned up just before
 they were having Colonel Appleton and Brigadier Gen-
 eral Byng to dinner, and Eveline’s asking him to stay
 made things very awkward because the General thought
 Quakers were slackers of the worst kind, and Don flared
 up and said a pacifist could be a better patriot than a staff
 officer in a soft job and that patriotism was a crime against
 humanity anyway. It would have been very disagreeable
 if Colonel Appleton who had drunk a great many cock-
          228

666
tads hadn’t broken through the little gilt chair 'he was sit-

ting on and the General had laughed and kidded the
Colonel with a bad pun about avoir du poise that took
everybody’s mind off the argument. Eleanor was very
sore about Don, and after the guests had left she and
Eveline had a standup quarrel. Next morning Eleanor
wouldn’t speak to herj Eveline went out to look for an-
other apartment.



                                               NEWSREEL XXVIII


                              Oh the eagles they fly high
                                  In Mobtle^ in Mobile

        Americans swim broad river and scale steep banks of canal

in brilliant capture of Dun. It is a remarkable fact that the
Compagnie Generale Transatlantique, more familiarly known

as the French Linej has not lost a single vessel in its regular
passenger service during the entire period of the war

                RED FLAG FLIES ON BALTIC

         ‘^I went through Egypt to join AUenbyj’’ he said,           flew

in an aeroplane making the journey m two hours that it took

the children of Israel forty years to make. That is something

to set people thinking of the progress of modern science.”

                              Lucky corns dorUt fly
                                   In Mobiley in Mobile

       PERSHING FORCES FOE FURTHER BACK

         SINGS FOR WOUNDED SOLDIERSJ NOT SHOT AS SFT

                          Je donnerais Versdlles
                              Pans et Smnt Denis
                          Le tours de Noire Dame
                              Les clochers de mon fays
                                                                                       22^

667
   aEl.P THE FOOD ADMINISTRATION BY
              REPORTING WAR PROFITEERS

         the completeness of the accord reached on most points

the conferees caused satisfaction and even some surprise among
participants

    REDS FORCE MERCHANT VESSELS TO FLEE
                               HUNS ON RUN
                          Aufrh de ma blonde
                              Qu^tl jait bon jatt bon jcdt bon
                          Aufres de ma blonde
                              Qu^il jait bon dormtr

         CHEZ LES SOCIALISTES LES AVEUGLES
                                        SONT ROI

         The German government requests the President of the
United States of America to take steps for the restoration of
peace, to notify all the belligerents of this request and to invite
them to delegate plenipotentiaries for the purpose of taking
up negotiations. The German Government accepts, as a basis
for the peace negotiations, the programme laid down by the
President of the United States in his message to Congress of
January 8th, 1918, and in his subsequent pronouncements, par-
ticularly in his address of September 27th, 1918. In order to
avoid further bloodshed the German government requests the
President of the United States to bring about the immediate
conclusion of a general armistice on land, on the water, and in
the air.



                                                           JOE WILLIAMS


     Joe had been hanging around New York and Brooklyn
for a while, borrowing money from Mrs. Olsen and get-
ting tanked up all the time. One day she went to work
 and threw him out. It was damned cold and he had to go
          230

668
to a mission a couple of nights. He was afraid of getting
arrested for the draft and he was fed up with every
goddam things it ended by his going out as ordinary sea-
man on the Affalachiany a big new freighter bound for
Bordeaux and Genoa. It kinder went with the way he felt
being treated like a jailbird again and swobbing decks and
chipping paint. In the focastle there was mostly country
kids who’d never seen the sea and a few old bums who
weren’t good for anything. They got into a dirty blow
four days out and shipped a small tidal wave that stove
in two of the starboard lifeboats and the convoy got scat-
tered and they found that the deck hadn’t been properly
caulked and the water kept coming down into the focastle.
It turned out that Joe was the only man they had on board
the mate could trust at the wheel, so they took him off
scrubbing paint and in his four hour tricks he had plenty
of time to think about how lousy everything was. In Bor-
deaux he’d have liked to look up Marceline, but none of
the crew got to go ashore.
    The bosun went and got cockeyed with a couple of
doughboys and came back with a bottle of cognac for Joe,
whom he’d taken a shine to, and a lot of latrine talk about
how the frogs were licked and the limeys and the wops
were licked something terrible and how if it hadn’t been
for us the Kaiser ud be riding into gay Paree any day
and as it was it was nip and tuck. It was cold as hell.
Joe and the bosun went and drank the cognac in the galley
with the cook who was an old timer who’d been in the
Edondike gold rush. They had the ship to themselves be-
cause the officers were all ashore taking a look at the ma-
demosels and everybody else was asleep. The bosun said it
was the e^id of civilization and the cook said he didn’t give
a f—^k and Joe said he didn’t give a f—^k and the bosun
said they were a couple of goddam bolshevikis and passed
out cold.
    It was a funny trip round Spain and through the

                                                                              231

669
Straits and up the French coast to Genoa. All the way
there was a single file of camouflaged freighters, Greeks
and Britishers and Norwegians and Amencans, all hug-
ging the coast and creeping along with lifepreservers piled
on deck and boats swung out on the davits. Passing ^em
was another line coming back light, transports and colliers
from Italy and Saloniki, white hospital ships, every kind
of old tub out of the seven seas, rusty freighters with their
screws so far out of the water you could hear ^em thrash-
ing a couple of hours after they were hull down and out
of sight. Once they got into the Mediterranean there were
French and British battleships to seaward all the time
and sillylooking destroyers with their long smokesmudges
that would hail you and come aboard to see the ship’s
papers. Ashore it didn’t look like the war a bit. The
weather was sunny after they passed Gibraltar. The Span-
ish coast was green with bare pink and yellow mountains
back of the shore and all scattered with little white houses
like lumps of sugar that bunched up here and there into
towns. Crossing the Gulf of Lyons in a drizzling rain and
driving fog’ and nasty choppy sea they came within an
ace of running down a big felucca loaded with barrels of
wine. Then they were bowling along the French Riviera
in a howling northwest wind, with the redroofed towns
all bright and shiny and the dry hills rising rocky behind
them, and snowmountains standing out clear up above.
After they passed Monte Carlo it was a circus, the houses
were all pink and blue and yellow and there were tall
poplars and tall pointed churchsteeples in all the valleys.
   That night they were on the lookout for the big light
marked on the chart for Genoa when they saw a red glare
ahead. Rumor went around that the heinies had captured
the town and were burning it. The second mate put up to
the skipper right on the bridge that they’d all be captured
if they went any further and they’d better go back and
put into Marseilles but the skipper told him it          none of

        232

670
his goddam business and to keep hfe mouth shut till hi»
opinion was asked. The glare got brighter as they got
nearer. It turned out to be a tanker on fire outside the
breakwater. She was a big new Standard Oil tanker, set-
tled a little in the bows with fire pouring out of her and
spreading out over the water. You could see the break-
water and the lighthouses and the town piling up the hills
behind with red glitter in all the windows and the crowded
ships in the harbor all lit up with the red flare.
    After they’d anchored, the bosun took Joe and a couple
of the youngsters in the dingy and they went over to see
what they could do aboard the tanker. The stern was way
up out of water. So far as they could see there was no one
on the ship. Some wops in a motorboat came up and jab-
bered at them but they pretended not to understand what
they meant. There was a fireboat standing by too, but
there wasn’t anything they could do. “Why the hell don’t
they scuttle her?” the bosun kept saying.
    Joe caught sight of a ropeladder hanging into the
water and pulled the dingy over to it. Before the others
had started yelling at him to come back he was half way
up it. When he jumped down onto the deck from the rail
he wondered what the hell he was doing up there. God
damn it, I hope she does blow up, he said aloud to him-
self. It was bright as day up there. The forward part of
the ship and the sea around it was burning like a lamp.
He reckoned the boat had hit a mine or been torpedoed.
The crew had evidently left in a hurry as there were all

sorts of bits of clothing and a couple of seabags by the
davits aft where the lifeboats had been. Joe picked him-
self out a nice new sweater and then went down into the

cabin. On a table he found a box of Havana cigars. He
took out a cigar and Et one. It made him feel good to
stand there and light a cigar with the goddam tanks ready
to blow him to Halifax any minute. It was a good cigar,

too. In a tissuepaper package on the table were seven

671
pairs of ladies’ silk stockings. Swell to take home to Del,
was his first thought. But then he remembered that he was
through with all that. He stuffed the silk stockings into

his pants pockets anyway, and went back on deck.
   The bosun was yelling at him from the boat for chris-
sake to come along or he’d get left. He just had time to
pick up a wallet on the companion way. ^Tt ain’t gasoline,

It’s crude oil. She might burn for a week,” he yelled at
the guys in the boat as he came slowly down the ladder
pulling at the cigar as he came and looking out over the
harbor packed with masts and stacks and derricks at the
big marble houses and the old towers and porticos and the
hills behind all lit up in red. ^Where the hell’s the crew?”
    “Probably all cockeyed ashore by this time, where I’d
like to be,” said the bosun. Joe diwied up the cigars but
he kept the silk stockings for himself. There wasn’t any-
thing in the wallet, “Hellofa note,” grumbled the bosun,
“haven’t they got any chemicals?” “These goddam wops
wouldn’t know what to do with ’em if they did have,”
said one of the youngsters.
   They rowed back to the Affahchian and reported to the
skipper that the tanker had been abandoned and it was up
to the port authorities to get rid of her.
   All next day the tanker burned outside the breakwater.
About nightfall another of her tanks went off like a roman
candle and the fire began spreading more and more over
the water. The Affdachim heaved her anchor and went
up to the wharf.
    That night Joe and the bosun went out to look at the
iown. The streets were narrow and had steps in them
leading up the hill to broad avenues, with cafes and little
tables out under the colonnades, where the pavenxents were
all polished marble set in patterns. It was pretty chilly
and they went into a bar and drank pink hot drinks with
mm in them.
    There they ran into a wop named Charley who’d been

        ^^34

672
twelve years in Brooklyn and he took them to a dump
where they ate a lot of spaghetti and fried veal and drank
white wine. Charley told about how they treated you like
a dog in the Eyetalian army and the pay was five cents a
day and you didn’t even get that and Charley was all for

il Presidente Veelson and the fourteen points and said soon
they’d make peace without victory and bigga revoluzione

ill Italia and make bigga war on the Francese and the
Inglese treata Eyetalian lika dirt. Charley brought in twd
girls he said were his cousins, Nedda and Dora, and one
of ’em sat on Joe’s knees and, boy, how she could eat
spaghetti, and they all drank wine. It cost ’em all the
money Joe had to pay for supper.
    When he was taking Nedda up to bed up an outside
staircase in the courtyard he could see the flare of the tanker
burning outside of the harbor on the blank walls and tiled
roofs of the houses.
    Nedda wouldn’t get undressed but wanted to see Joe’s
money. Joe didn’t have any money so he brought out the
silk stockings. She looked worried and shook her head
oui she was darn pretty and had big black eyes and Joe
wanted it bad and yelled for Charley and Charley came
up the stairs and talked wop to the girl and said sure
she’d take the silk stockings and wasn’t America the great-
est country in the world and tutti aleati and Presidente
Veelson big man for Italia. But the girl wouldn’t go ahead
until they’d gotten hold of an old woman who was m the
kitchen, who came wheezing up the stairs and felt the
stockings, and musta said they were real silk and worth
money, because the girl put her arm around Joe’s neck
and Charley said, ^^Sure, pard, she sleepa with you all
night, maka love good.”
    But about midnight when the girl had gone to sleep
Joe got tired of lying there. He could smell the closets
down in the court and a rooster kept crowing loud as the
dickens like it was right under his ear. He got up and put

                                                                              235

673
on his clothes and tiptoed out. The silk stocldngs were
hanging on a chair. He picked ’em up and shoved them in

his pockets again. His shoes creaked like hell. The street
door was all bolted and barred and he had a devil of a
time getting it open. Just as he got out in the street a dog
began to bark somewhere and he ran for it. He got lost
in a million little narrow stone streets^ but he figured that

if he kept on going down hill he’d get to the harbor some-
time. Then he began to see the pink glow from the burn-

ing: tanker again on some of the housewalls and steered
by that.
    On some steep steps he ran into a couple of Americans
in khaki uniforms and asked them the way and they gave
him a drink out of a bottle of cognac and said they were
on their way to the Eyetalian front and that there’d been
a big retreat and that everything was cockeyed and they
didn’t know where the cockeyed front was and they were
going to wait right theie till the cockeyed front came
right to them. He told ’em about the silk stockings and
they thought it was goddam funny, and showed him the
way to the wharf where the Affalachmn was and they
shook hands a great many times when they said goodnight
and they said the wops were swine and he said they were
princes to have shown him the way and they said he was
a prince and they finished up the cognac and he went on
board and tumbled into his bunk.
    When the Affalachian cleared for home the tanker was
still burning outside the harbor. Joe came down with dose
on the trip home and he couldn’t drink anything for sev-
eral months and kinda steadied down when he got to
Brooklyn. He went to the shoreschool run by the Shipping
Board in Platt Institute and got his second mate’s license
and made trips back and forth between New York and St.
Nazaire all through that year on a new wooden boat built
in Seattle called the Owanda^ and a lot of trouble they
had with her.

        236

674
   He and Janey wrote each other often. She was o\^er-
seas with the Red Cross and very patriotic. Joe began to
think that maybe she was right. Anyway if you believed
the papers the heinies were getting licked, and it was a
big opportunity for a young guy if you didn’t get in wrong
by being taken for a proGerman or a Bolshevik or some
goddam thing. After all as Janey kept writing civilization
had to be saved and it was up to us to do it. Joe started
a savings account and bought him a Liberty bond.
   Armistice night Joe was in St. Nazaire. The town was
wild. Everybody ashore, all the doughboys out of their
camps, all the frog soldiers out of their barracks, every-
body clapping everybody else on the back, pulling corks,
giving each other drinks, popping champagne bottles, kiss-
ing every pretty girl, being kissed by old women, kissed
on both cheeks by French veterans with whiskers. The
mates and the skipper and the chief and a couple of naval
officers they’d never seen before all started to have a big
feed in a cafe but they never got further than soup be-
cause everybody was dancing in the kitchen and they
poured the cook so many drinks he passed out cold and
they all sat there singing and drinking champagne out of
tumblers and cheering the allied flags that girls kept
carrying through.
    Joe went cruising looking for Jeanette who was a girl
he’d kinder taken up with whenever he was in St. Nazaire.
He wanted to find her before he got too zigzag. She’d
promised to couchay with him that night before it turned
out to be Armistice Day. She said she never couchayed with
anybody else all the time the Owanda was in port and he
treated her right and brought her beaucoup presents from
L’Amerique, and du sucer and du cafay. Joe felt good,
he had quite a wad in his pocket and, god damn it, American
                                                                   and a couple of
money was worth something these days 5
pounds of sugar he’d brought in the pockets of his raincoat
was better than money with the mademosels.

675
    He went in back where there was a cabaret all red
plush with mirrors and the music was playing The Scar
Sfangled Banner and everybody cried Vive L’Amerique
and pushed drinks in his face as he came in and then he
was dancing with a fat girl and the music was playing
some damn foxtrot or other. He pulled away from the
fat girl because he^ seen Jeanette. She had an American
flag draped over her dress. She was dancing with a big six-
foot black Senegalese. Joe saw red. He pulled her away
from the nigger who was a frog officer all full of gold
braid and she said, ^Wazamatta cherie,” and Joe hauled
off and hit the damn nigger as hard as he could right on
the button but the nigger didn^t budge. The nigger’s face
had a black puzzled smiling look like he was just going
to ask a question. A waiter and a coupla frog soldiers came
up and tried to pull Joe away. Everybody was yelling
and jabbering. Jeanette was trying to get between Joe
and the waiter and got a sock in the jaw that knocked her
flat. Joe laid out a couple of frogs and was backing off
towards the door, when he saw in the mirror that a big
guy in a blouse was bringing down a bottle on his head
held with both hands. He tried to swing around but he
didn’t have time. The bottle crashed his skull and he was
out


                                              NEWSREEL XXIX


        the arrival of the news caused the swamping of the city’*^
 ielephone lines

                    Y jallait fas
                        Y jallait fas
                            Y jallait fas-a--a--a-‘a-yallez

             BIG GUNS USED IN HAMBURG
         238

676
        at the Custom House the crowd sang The Star Spangled
Banner under the direction of Byron R. Newton the Collector

of the Port

MORGAN ON WINDOWLEDGE
              KICKS HEELS AS HE SHOWERS
                                   CROWD WITH TICKERTAPE

         down at the battery the siren of the fireboat New York

let out a shriek when the news reached there and in less time

than it takes to say boo pandemonium broke loose all along the

waterfront

               Oh say can you see by the dawn^s early light

        WOMEN MOB CROWN PRINCE FOR
                              KISSING MODISTE

                          Allans enjants de la fatrie
                               Le jour de glolre est arrive

                      Ids the wrong way to tickle Mary
                      Ids the wrong 'place to go

          ‘‘We’ve been at war with the devil and it was worth all

 the suffering it entailed,” said William Howard Taft at a vic-

 tory celebration here last night

                   Kakakatee^ beauUjul Katee
                       She^s the only gugugirl that I adore
                       And when the moon shines

                                                                         Unipress, N, Y.

          Paris urgent Brest Admiral Wilson who announced

  i6.00 (4P.M.) Brest newspaper armistice been signed later

  notified unconfirmable meanwhile Brest riotously celebrating

       TWO TROLLIES HELD UP BY GUNMEN IN
                                             QUEENS

                   Over the cowshed
                        Pll be wcdting at the kakakitchen door

                                                                                         239

677
SPECIAL GRAND JURY ASKED TO INDICT
                               BOLSHEVISTS

       the soldiers and sailors gave the only touch of color tc
the celebration. They went in wholeheartedly for having ?

good time, getting plenty to drink despite the fact that they
were in uniformc Some of these returned fighters nearly
caused a not when they took an armful of stones and attempted
to break an electric sign at Broadway and Forty-second Street
reading:

       WELCOME HOME TO OUR HEROES

    Oh say can you see by the dawn^s early light
    What so froudly we hailed at the twillghds last gleaming
    When the rockeds red glare the bombs bursting in air
    Was froof to our eyes that the flag was still there



                              THE CAMERA EYE (36)


        when we emptied the rosies to leeward over the side

every night after the last inspection we’d stop for a

moment’s gulp of the November gale the lash of spray

in back of your ears for a look at the spume splintered

off the leaping waves shipwreckers drowners of men (in

their great purple floating mines rose and fell gently sub-

marines travelled under them on an even keel) to glance

at the sky veiled with scud to take our hands off the greasy

handles of the cans full of slum they couldnt eat (nine

meals nine dumpings of the leftover grub nine cussing-

matches with the cockney steward who tried tc hold out

         240

678
on the stewed apricots inspections AttenSHUN           click

clack At Ease        shoot the flashlight in everycorner of

the tin pans nine lineups along the heaving airless cor-

ridor of seasick seascared doughboys with their messkits

’n their hands)
        Hay sojer tell me theyVe signed an armistice        tell

me the wars over      they’re takin us home       latrine talk

the hell you say now I’ll tell one we were already

leading the empty rosies down three flights of iron ladders

into the heaving retching hold starting up with the full

whenever the ship rolled a little slum would trickle out

the side


                                        MEESTER VEELSON


         The year that Buchanan was elected president
 Thomas Woodrow Wilson
         was born to a presbyterian minister’s daughter

         in the manse at Staunton in the valley of Virginia j

 it was the old Scotch-Irish stockj the father was a pres-

 byterian minister too and a teacher of rhetoric in theo-
                                    the Wilsons lived in a universe of
 logical seminaries 5
 words linked into an incontrovertible firmament by two

 centuries of calvinist divines,
          God was the Word
          and the Word was God.
          Dr. Wilson was a man of standing who loved his
  home and his children and good books and his wife and

  correct syntax and talked to God every day at family

  prayers 3
                                                                                241

679
        he brought his sons up
        between the biWe and the dictionary.

        The years of the Civil War
        the years of fife and drum and platoonfire and
proclamations
        the Wilsons lived in Augusta, Georgia, Tommy
was a backward child, didn^t learn his letters till he
was nine, but when he learned to read his favorite read-
ing was Parson Weems’
        Life of Washington,

        In 1870 Dr. Wilson was called to the Theological
                                                                        Tommy at-
Seminary at Columbia, South Carolina 3
tended Davidson college,
        where he developed a good tenor voice 5
        then he went to Princeton and became a debater
and editor of the Princetonian, His first published ar-
ticle in the Nassau Literary Magazine was an apprecia-
tion of Bismarck.

        Afterwards he studied law at the University of Vir-
            young Wilson wanted to be a Great Man, like
ginia 3
Gladstone and the eighteenth century English parlia-
                     he wanted to hold the packed benches spell-
mentarians 3
                                                 but lawpractice irked him
bound in the cause of Truth 3                                             3
he was more at home in the booky air of libraries, lec-
turerooms, college chapel, it was a relief to leave his
lawpractice at Atlanta and take a Historical Fellowship
                                 there he wrote Congressional Gov-
at Johns Hopkins 3
ernment.
         At twentynine he married a girl with a taste for
painting (while he was courting her he coached her In
how to use the broad            and got a job at Bryn Mawr
teaching the girls History and Political Economy.
When he got his Ph.D. from Johns Hopkins he moved
         242

680
to a professorship at Wesleyan, wrote articles, started
a History of the United States,
        spoke out for Truth Reform Responsible Govern-
ment Democracy from the lecture platform, climbed
                                                                               in 1901
all the steps of a brilliant university career 5
the trustees of Princeton offered him the presidency,
        he plunged into reforming the university, made
violent friends and enemies, set the campus by the ears,
        and the American people began to find on the
front pages
        the name of Woodrow Wilson.

        In 1909 he made addresses on Lincoln and Robert
E. Lee
        and in 1910
        the democratic bosses of New Jersey, hardpressed
by muckrakers and reformers, got the bright idea of
offering the nomination for governor to the stainles?
college president who attracted such large audiences
        by publicly championing Right.

         When Mr. Wilson addressed the Trenton conven-
tion that nominated him for governor he confessed his
belief in the common man, (the smalltown bosses and
the wardheelers looked at each other and scratched
                        he went on, his voice growing firmer:
 their heads) 3
         that is the mo/n by whose judgment I for one wish
 to he gmdedy so that as the tasks multiply^ and as the
 days come when all will feel confusion and dismay^ me
 may lift uf our eyes to the hills out of these dark
 valleys where the crags of sfecial 'privilege overshadow
 and darken our pathy to where the sun gleams through
 the great passage in the broken cliffSy      the sun of Gody
         the sun meant to regenerate meny
         the sun meant to liberate them from their passion
 md despair and lift us to those uplands which are th4
                                                                               H3

681
'promised, land of &oery man who desires liberty and
achievement.
        The smalltown bosses and the wardheelers looked
                                                                            then they
at each other and scratched their heads j
cheered, Wilson fooled the wiseacres and double-
crossed the bosses, was elected by a huge plurality 3

        so he left Princeton only half reformed to be
Governor of New Jersey,
        and became reconciled with Bryan
        at the Jackson Day dinner: when Bryan remarked,
      of course knew that you were not with me in my
position on the currency,” Mr. Wilson replied, “All I
can say, Mr. Bryan, is that you are a great big man.”
        He was introduced to Colonel House,
        that amateur Merlin of politics who was spinning
his webs at the Hotel Gotham
        and at the convention in Baltimore the next July
the upshot of the puppetshow staged for sweating dele-
gates by Hearst and House behind the scenes, and
Bryan booming in the corridors with a handkerchief
over his wilted collar, was that Woodrow Wilson was
nominated for the presidency.
        The bolt of the Progressives in Chicago from Taft
to T.R. made his election sure 5
        so he left the State of New Jersey halfreformed
        (pitiless publicity was the slogan of the Shadow
Lawn Campaign)
        and went to the White House
        our twentyeighth president.
        While Woodrow Wilson drove up Pennsylvania
Avenue beside Taft the great buttertub, who as presi-
dent had been genially undoing T.R.’s reactionary ef-
forts to put business under the control of the govern-
ment,

        J. Pierpont Morgan sat playing solitaire in his
        244

682
back office on Wall Street, smoking twenty black cigars
a day, cursing the follies of democracy.
        Wilson flayed the interests and branded privilege
refused to recognize Huerta and sent the militia to the
Rio Grande
        to assume a policy of watchful waiting. He pub-
lished The New Freedom and delivered his messages
to Congress in person, like a college president address-
ing the faculty and students. At Mobile he said:
        I wish to take this occasion to say that the United
States will never again seek one additional foot of terri-
tory by conquest;
        and he landed the marines at Vera Cruz.

        We are witnessing a renaissance of fublic spirit^ a
reawakening of sober public opinion, a revival of the
power of the people the beginning of an age of thought-
ful reconstruction . .      .
        but the world had started spinning round Sarajevo.
        First it was neutrality in thought and deed, then
too proud to fight when the Lusitania sinking and the
danger to the Morgan loans and the stories of the Brit-

ish and French propagandists set all the financial centers
in the East bawling for war, but the suction of the
                                                                   the best people
drumbeat and the guns was too strong j
took their fashions from Paris and their broad “a’s”
from London, and T.R. and the House of Morgan.
        Five months after his reelection on the slogan He
kept us out of war, Wilson pushed the Armed Ship
Bill through congress and declared that a state of war
existed between the United States and the Central
Powers:
        Fone without stint or limit, force to the utmost.

        Wilson became the state (war is the health of the
state), Washington his Versailles, manned the socialized

                                                                              245

683
government with dollar a year men out of the great
corporations and ran the big parade
        of men munitions groceries mules and trucks to
France. Five million men stood at attention outside of
their tarpaper barracks every sundown while they
played The Star S-pmgled, Banner.
        War brought the eight hour day, women’s votes,
prohibition, compulsory arbitration, high wages, high
rates of interest, cost plus contracts and the luxury of
being a Gold Star Mother.
        If you objected to making the world safe for cost
plus democracy you went to jail with Debs.
        Almost too soon the show was over. Prince Max
of Baden was pleading for the Fourteen Points, Foch
was occupying the bridgeheads on the Rhine and the
Kaiser out of breath ran for the train down the platform
at Potsdam wearing a silk hat and some say false
whiskers.
        With the help of Almighty God, Righty Truthy
Justicey Freedomy Democracyy the Selfdetermination of
Nations, No indemnities no annexations,
        and Cuban sugar and Caucasian manganese and
Northwestern wheat and Dixie cotton, the British
blockade, General Pershing, the taxicabs of Paris and
the seventyfive gun
        we won the war.

        On December 4th, 1918, Woodrow Wilson, the
first president to leave the territory of the United States
during his presidency, sailed for France on board the
George Washington,
         the most powerful man in the world.

         In Europe they knew what gas smelt like and the
sweet sick stench of bodies buried too shallow and the
                                                                        they read in
grey look of the skin of starved children j
         246

684
                      )                                )



the papers that Meester Veelson was for peace and free-'
dom and canned goods and butter and sugarj
        he landed at Brest with his staff of experts and
publicists after a rough trip on the George Washington.
        La France heroYque was there with the speeches,
the singing schoolchildren, the mayors in their red
sashes. (Did Meester Veelson see the gendarmes at
Brest beating back the demonstration of dockyard
workers who came to meet him with red flags?)
        At the station in Paris he stepped from the train
onto a wide red carpet that lead him, between rows of
potted palms, silk hats, legions of honor, decorated
busts of uniforms, frockcoats, rosettes, boutonnieres, to
a Rolls Royce. (Did Meester Veelson see the women
in black, the cripples in their little carts, the pale anxious
faces along the streets, did he hear the terrible anguish
of the cheers as they hurried him and his new wife to
the hotel de Murat, where in rooms full of brocade,
gilt clocks. Buhl cabinets and ormolu cupids the presi-
dential suite had been prepared?
        While the experts were organizing the procedure
of the peace conference, spreading green baize on the
tables, arranging the protocols,
        the Wilsons took a tour to see for themselves: the
day after Christmas they were entertained at Bucking-
                       at Newyears they called on the pope and
ham Palace 5
on the microscopic Italian king at the Quirinal. (Did
Meester Veelson know that in the peasants’ wargrimed
houses along the Brenta and the Piave they were buriv-
ing candles in front of his picture cut out of the illus-
trated papers?) (Did Meester Veelson know that the
people of Europe spelled a challenge to oppression out
of the Fourteen Points as centuries before they had
spelled a challenge to oppression out of the ninetyfive

articles Martin Luther nailed to the churchdoor in
Wittenberg?
                                                                               247

685
        January 1 8, 1919, in the midst of serried uniforms,
cocked hats and gold braid, decorations, epaulettes, or-
ders of merit and knighthood, the High Contracting
Parties, the allied and associated powers met in the
Salon de I’Horloge at the quai d’CDrsay to dictate the
peace,
        but the grand assembly of the peace conference
was too public a place to make peace in
        so the High Contracting Parties
        formed the Council of Ten, went into the Gobelin
Room and, surrounded by Rubens’s History of Marie
de Medici,
        began to dictate the peace.
        But the Council of Ten was too public a place to
make peace in
        so they formed the Council of Four.
        Orlando went home in a huff
        and then there were three:
        Clemenceau,
        Lloyd George,
        Woodrow Wilson.
        Three old men shuffling the pack,
        dealing out the cards:
        the Rhineland, Danzig, the Polish corridor, the
Ruhr, self determination of small nations, the Saar,
League of Nations, mandates, the Mespot, Freedom of
the Seas, Transjordania. Shantung, Fiume and the
Island of Yap:
        machine gun fire and arson
        starvation, lice, cholera, typhusj
        oil was trumps.

         Woodrow Wilson believed in his father’s God
         so he told the parishioners in the little Lowther
Street Congregational church where his grandfather
had preached in Carlisle in Scotland, a day so chilly that
         248

686
the newspaper men sitting in the old pews all had to
keep their overcoats on.

        On April 7th he ordered the George Washtngton
to be held at Brest with steam up ready to take the
American delegation homej
        but he didn’t go.

        On April 19 sharper Clemenceau and sharper
Lloyd George got him into their little cosy threecard-
game they called the Council of Four.

        On June a 8 th the Treaty of Versailles was ready
        and Wilson had to go back home to explain to the
politicians who’d been ganging up on him meanwhile
in the Senate and House and to sober public opinion
and to his father’s God how he’d let himself be trimmed
and how far he’d made the world safe
        for democracy and the New Freedom.
        From the day he landed in Hoboken he had his
back to the wall of the White House, talking to save
his faith in words, talking to save his faith in the
League of Nations, talking to save his faith in himself,
in his father’s God.
        He strained every nerve of his body and brain,
every agency of the government he had under his
               (if anybody disagreed he was a crook or a redj
control j
no pardon for Debs).
         In Seattle the wobblies whose leaders were in

jail, in Seattle the wobblies whose leaders had been
lynched, who’d been shot down like dogs, in Seattle
the wobblies lined four blocks as Wilson passed, stood

silent with their arms folded staring at the great liberal

as he was hurried past in his car, huddled in his over-

coat, haggard with fatigue, one side of his face twitch-

ing. The men in overalls, the workingstiffs let him

                                                                              249

687
pass in silence after all the other blocks of handclapping
and patriotic cheers.
        In Pueblo, Colorado, he was a grey man hardly
able to stand, one side of his face twitching:
        Now that the mists of this great question have
cleared away^ I believe that men will see the Truth^
eye for eye and face to face. There is one thing the
American Peofle always rise to and extend their hand
tOy that iSy the truth of justice and of liberty and of feace.
We have accented that truth and we are going to be
led by ity and it is going to lead uSy and through us the
worldy out into pastures of quietness and feace such as
the world never dreamed of before.
        That was his last speech ^
        on the train to Wichita he had a stroke. He gave
up the speaking tour that was to sweep the country for
the League of Nations. After that he was a ruined
paralysed man barely able to speak;
        the day he gave up the presidency to Harding the
joint committee of the Senate and House appointed
Henry Cabot Lodge, his lifelong enemy, to make the
formal call at the executive office in the Capitol and
ask the formal question whether the president had any
message for the congress assembled in joint session,
        Wilson managed to get to his feet, lifting himself
painfully by the two arms of the chair. “Senator
Lodge, I have no further communication to make,
thank you .     .  . Good morning,” he said.
         In 1924 on February 3rd he died.









         250

688
                                                    NEWSREEL XXX

                MONSTER GUNS REMOVED?

            Longhaired freachers come out every night
            Try to tell you whads wrong and whads right
            But when asked about something to eat
            They will answer in accents so sweet
        PRESIDENT HAS SLIGHT COLD AT SEA

        Special Chef and Staff of Waiters and Kitchen Helpers
Drafted from the Biltmore
        Every Comfort Provided
        Orchestra to Play During Meals and Navy Yard Band
to Play for Deck Music

                     You will eat bye and bye
                     In that glorious land above the sky

        the city presents a picture of the wildest destruction espe-
cially around the General Post Office which had been totall}
destroyed by fire, nothing but rums remaining

                                       Work and fray
                                           Live on hay

        Three Truckloads of Records Gathered Here

         eleven men were killed and twentythree injured, some
of them seriously as the result of an explosion of fulminate of
mercury in the priming unit of one of the cap works of the
E. I. duPont de Nemours Powder Company, in the evening
Mrs. Wilson released earner pigeons .       .  . and through it all
how fine the sfirit of the nation wasy what unity of furfose
what untiAng %eal what elevation of furfose ran through all

its sflendid disflay of strengthy its untiring accomflishment.
I have said that those of us who stayed at home to do the work

 of organisation and suffly would always wish we had been
with the men we sustained by our labory hut we can never he
ashamed ... in the dining room music was furnished by a
quartet of sailors

                                                                                       2St

689
                               You^ll get fie
                                   In the sky
                                       When you die

GORGAS WOULD PUT SOLDIERS IN HUTS

      800 FIGHTING MEN CHEER BOLSHEVIKI

        All the arrangements were well ordered but the crowd
was kept at a distance. The people gathered on the hills near
the pier raised a great shout when the president’s launch
steamed up. A detour was made from the Champs Elysees to
cross the Seme over the Alexander III bridge which recalled
another historic pageant when Paris outdid herself to honor
an absolute ruler in the person of the czar.

    ADDRESSED I4OO MAYORS FROM PALACE BALCONY

BRITISH NAVY TO BE SUPREME DECLARES
                                 CHURCHILL



                            THE CAMERA EYE (37)


       alfhabetically according to rank tapped out with two

cold index fingers on the company Corona Allots Class
A ^ B Ins frem C D

       Atten—SHUN snap to the hooks and eyes at my

throat constricting the adamsapple bringing together the
US and the Caduceus

       At Ease

       outside they’re drilling in the purple drizzle of a

winter afternoon in Ferrieres en Gatinais, Abbaye foxinded

by Clovis over the skeletons of three disciples of notre

        252

690
seigneur Jesus-Christ ^rd Lib Loan Sec of Treas Altian

Politian and Hermatian 4th Lib Loan Sec of Treas mmt

he on CL E or other form Q,M,C, ^8 now it’s raining

hard and the gutters gurgle there’s tinkling from all the

little glassgreen streams Alcuin was prior once and mill-

wheels grind behind the mossed stone walls and Clodhild^

and Clodomir were buried here

       promotions only marked under gains drowsily clacked

out on the rusteaten Corona in the cantonment of O’Riel-

ly’s Travelling Circus alone except for the undertaker sol-

diering in his bunk and the dry hack of the guy that has
TB that the MO was never sober enough to examine

                       Iodine will make you happy

                       lodme will make you well

fourthirty the pass comes alive among the CC pills in

my pocket

        the acting QM Sarge and the Topkicker go out

through the gate of USAAS base camp in their slickers in

the lamplit rain and make their way without a cent in their
OD to the Cheval Blanc where by chevrons and parleyvoo-

ing they bum drinks and omelettes avec pommes frites and

kid applecheeked Madeleine may wee

        in the dark hallway to the back room the boys are

lined up waiting to get in to the girl in black from out of

town to drop ten francs and hurry to the propho station

 wl viol sk not L D viol Go 41/14 rd- sent S CM

691
        outside it^s raining on the cobbled town Inside we

drink vin rouge parlezvous froglegs may wee couchez avec

and the old territorial at the next table drinks illegal

pemod and remarks Toute est bien fait dans la nature a

la votre aux Americains

                            A'pres la guerre jinee

                            Back Id the States for me

        Dans la mort II n^ a rien de terrible Quant on va

mourlr on pense a tout mals vite

       the first day In the year dismissed after roUcall I went

walking with a fellow from Philadelphia along the purple

wintryrutted roads under the purple embroidery of the

pleached trees full of rooks cackling overhead over thei

ruddier hills to a village weVe going to walk a long way

get good wine full of Merovingian names millwheels

glassgreen streams where the water gurgles out of old

stone gargoyles Madeleine’s red apples the smell of beech

leaves we’re going to drink wine the boy from Philadel-

phia’s got beaucoup jack wintry purpler wine the sun

breaks out through the clouds on the first day in the year

       in the first village

       we stop in our tracks

       to look at 9 waxwork

        the old man has shot the pretty peasant girl who looks

like Madeleine but younger she lies there shot In the left

breast in the blood in the ruts of the road pretty and plump

as a little quail

692
        The old man then took off one shoe and put the

shotgun under his chin pulled the trigger with his toe and

blew the top of his head off we stand looking at the bare

foot and the shoe and the foot in the shoe and the shot

gir] and the old man with a gunnysack over his head and

the dirty bare toe he pulled the trigger with Faut pas

toucher until the commissaire comes proces verbale

         on this first day

         of the year the sun

         is shining

                                                   NEWSREEL XXXI


         washing and dressing hastily they came to the ground

 floor at the brusque call of the commissaries, being assembled

 in one of the rear rooms in the basement of the house. Here

 they were lined up in a semicircle along the wall, the young
 grandduchesses trembling at the unusual nature of the orders

 given and at the gloomy hour. They more than suspected the

 errand upon which the commissaries had come. Addressing

 the czar, Yarodsky, without the least attempt to soften his

 announcement, stated that they must all die and at once. The

 revolution was in danger, he stated, and the fact that there

 were still the members of the reigning house living added to

  that danger. Therefore to remove them was the duty of all

  Russian patriots. ^^Thus your life is ended,” he said in com

 elusion.
               am ready,” was the simple announcement of the czar,

  while the czarina, clinging to him, loosed her hold long
  enough to make the sign of the cross, an example followed by

  the grandduchess Olga and by Dr. Botkin,
           The czarevitch, paralyzed with fear, stood in stupefac-

  tion beside his mother, uttering no sound either in supplication

                                                                                         255

693
or protest, while his three sisters and the other grandduchesses
sank to the floor trembling.
        Yarodsky drew his revolver and fired the first shot. A
volley followed and the pnsoners reeled to the ground. Where
the bullets failed to find their mark the bayonet put the finish-
ing touches. The mingled blood of the victims not only cov-
ered the floor of the room where the execution took place but
ran in streams along the hallway


                                                             DAUGHTER


    The Trents lived in a house on Pleasant avenue that was
the finest street in Dallas that was the biggest and fastest
growing town in Texas that was the biggest state in the
Union and had the blackest soil and the whitest people and
America was the greatest country in the world and Daugh-
ter was Dad’s onlyest sweetest little girl. Her real name
was Anne Elizabeth Trent after poor dear mother who
had died when she was a little tiny girl but Dad and the
boys called her Daughter. Buddy’s real name was William
Delaney Trent like Dad who was a prominent attorney,
and Buster’s real name was Spencer Anderson Trent.
    Winters they went to school and summers they ran wild
on the ranch that grandfather had taken up as a pioneer.
When they’d been very little there hadn’t been any fences
yet and still a few maverick steers out along the creekbot-
toms, but by the time Daughter was in highschool every-
thing was fenced and they were building a macadam road
out from Dallas and Dad went everywhere in the Ford in-
stead of on his fine Arab stallion Mullah he’d been given
by a stockman at the Fat Stock Show in Waco when the
stockman had gone broke and hadn’t been able to pay his
lawy^er’s fee. Daughter had a creamcolored pony named
Coffee who’d nod his head and paw with his hoof when he
wanted a lump of sugar, but some of the girls she knew

694
had cars and Daughter and the boys kept after Dad to buy
a car, a real car instead of that miserable old flivver he
drove around the ranch.
   When Dad bought a Pierce Arrow touring car the spring
Daughter graduated from highschool, she was the happiest
girl in the world. Sitting at the wheel in a fluffy white
dress the morning of Commencement outside the house
waiting for Dad, who had just come out from the office and
was changing his clothes, she had thought how much she’d
like to be able to see herself sitting there in the not too hot
June morning in the lustrous black shiny car among the
shiny brass and nickel fixtures under the shiny paleblue big
Texas sky in the middle of the big flat rich Texas country
that ran for two hundred miles in every direction. She
could see half her face in the little oval mirror on the mud-
guard. It looked red and sunburned under her sandybrown
hair. If she only had red hair and a skin white like butter-
milk like Susan Gillespie had, she was wishing when she
saw Joe Washburn coming along the street dark and seri-
ouslooking under his panama hat. She fixed her face in a
shy kind of smile just in time to have him say, ^^How
lovely you look, Daughter, you must excuse ma sayin’ so.”
^T’m just waiting for Dad and the boys to go to the exer-

cises. O Joe, we’re late and Pm so excited. . . . i feel like
a sight.”
    ^Well, have a good time.” He walked on unhurriedly
putting his hat back on his head as he went. Something
hotter than the June sunshine had come out of Joe’s very
dark eyes and run in a blush over her face and down the
back of her neck under her thin dress and down the middle
of her bosom, where the little breasts that she tried never
to think of were just beginning to be noticeable. At last
Dad and the boys came out all looking blonde and dressed
up and sunburned. Dad made her sit in the back seat with
Bud who sat up stiff as a poker.
    The big wind that had come up drove grit in their faces.

695
After she caught sight of the brick buildings of the high-
school and the crowd and the light dresses and the stands
and the big flag with the stripes all wiggling against the
sky she got so excited she never remembered anything that
happened.
    That night, wearing her first evening dress at the dance
she came to in the feeling of tulle and powder and crowds,
boys all stiff and scared in their dark coats, girls pack-
ing into the dressing room to look at each otheris dresses.
She never said a word while she was dancing, just smiled
and held her head a little to one side and hoped some-
body would cut in. Half the time she didn’t know who
she was dancing with, just moved smiling in a cloud of
                                                 boys’ faces bobbed in front
pink tulle and colored lights 5
of her, tried to say smarty ladyldllerish things or else were
shy and tonguetied, different colored faces on top of the
same stiff bodies. Honestly she was surprised when Susan
Gillespie came up to her when they were getting their
wraps to go home and giggled, “My dear, you were the
belle of the ball.” When Bud and Buster said so next
morning and old black Emma who’d brought them all up
after mother died came in from the kitchen and said,
“Lawsy, Miss Annie, folks is talbn’ all over town about
how you was the belle of the ball last night,” she felt her-
self blushing happily all over. Emma said she’d heard it
from that noaccount yaller man on the milk route whose
aunt worked at Mrs. Washburn’s, then she set down the
popovers and went out with a grin as wide as a piano.
“Well, Daughter,” said Dad in his deep quiet voice, tap-
ping the top of her hand, “I thought so myself but I
thought maybe I was prejudiced.”
    During the summer Joe Washburn, who’d just gradu-
ated from law school at Austin and who was going into
Dad’s office in the fall, came and spent two weeks with
them on the ranch. Daughter was just horrid to him, made
old Hildreth give him a mean little old oneeyed pony to

         258

696
ride, put horned toads in his cot, would hand him hot
chile sauce instead of catsup at table or try to get him to
put salt instead of sugar in his coffee. The boys got so off
her they wouldn^t speak to her and Dad said she was get-
ting to be a regular tomboy, but she couldn^t seem to stop
acting like she did.
   Then one day they all rode over to eat supper on Clear
Creek and went swimming by moonlight in the deep
hole there was under the bluff. Daughter got a crazy
streak in her after a while and ran up and said she was
going to dive from the edge of the bluff. The water looked
so good and the moon floated shivering on top. They all
yelled at her not to do it but she made a dandy dive right
from the edge. But something was the matter. She^d hit
her head, it hurt terribly. She was swallowing water, she
was fighting a great weight that was pressing down on her,
that was Joe. The moonlight flowed out in a swirl leaving

it all black, only she had her arms around Joe^s neck, her
fingers were tightening around the ribbed muscles of hiu
arms. She came to with his face looking into hers and the
moon up in the sky again and warm stuff pouring over hei
forehead. She was trying to say, ^^Joe, I wanto, Joe, I
wanto,” but it all drained away into warm sticky black
again, only she caught his voice deep, deep   .  .  . ^^pretty
near had me drowned too  .  . and Dad sharp and angry
like in court,       told her she oughtn’t to dive off there.”
    She came to herself again in bed with her head hurting
horribly and Dr. Winslow there, and the first thing she
thought was where was Joe and had she acted like a little

 silly telling him she was crazy about him? But nobody said
 anything about it and they were all awful nice to her ex-

 cept that Dad came, still talking with his angry courtroom

 voice, and lectured her for being foolhardy and a tomboy
 and having almost cost Joe his life by the stranglehold she
 had on him when they’d pulled them both out of the

 water. She had a fractured skull and had to be in bed al/

                                                                               2SC

697
                                                                                           ^




summer and Joe was awful nice though he looked at her
kinder funny out of his sharp black eyes the first time he
came in her room. As long as he stayed on the ranch he
came to read to her after lunch. He read her all of Lorna
Doom and half of Nicholas Nickleby and she lay there in
bed, hot and cosy in her fever, feeling the rumble of his
deep voice through the pain in her head and fighting all
the time inside not to cry out like a little silly that she was
crazy about him and why didn’t he like her just a little bit.
When he’d gone it wasn’t any fun being sick any more.
Dad or Bud came and read to her sometimes but most of
the time she liked better reading to herself. She read all
of Dickens, Lorna Doone twice, and Poole’s The Harbor
that made her want to go to New York.
    Next fall Dad took her north for a year in a finishing
school in Lancaster, Pennsylvania. She was excited on the
trip up on the tram and loved every minute of it, but Miss
Tynge’s was horrid and the girls were all northern girls
and so mean and made fun of her clothes and talked about
nothing but Newport, and Southampton, and matinee idols
she’d never seen; she hated it. She cried every night after
she’d gone to bed thinking how she hated the school and
how Joe Washburn wmuld never like her now. When
Christmas vacation came and she had to stay on with the
two Miss Tynges and some of the teachers who lived too
far away to go home either, she just decided she wouldn’t
stand It any longer and one morning before anybody was
up she got out of the house, walked down to the station,
bought herself a ticket to Washington, and got on the first
Westbound train with nothing but a toothbrush and a night-
gown in her handbag. She was scared all alone on the train
at first but such a nice young Virginian who was a West
Point Cadet got on at Havre de Grace where she had to
change; they had the time of their lives together laughing
and talking. In Washington he asked permission to be her
escort in the nicest way and took her all around, to see the
        260

698
Capitol and the White House and the Smithsonian Insti-
tute and set her up to lunch at the New Willard and put
her on the train for St. Louis that night. His name was
Paul English. She promised she’d write him every day
of her life. She was so excited she couldn’t sleep lying in
her berth loobng out of the window of the pullman at the
trees and the circling hills all in the faint glow of snow
and now and then lights speeding byj she could remember
exactly how he looked and how his hair was parted and
the long confident grip of his hand when they said goodby.
She’d been a little nervous at first, but they’d been like old
friends right from the beginning and he’d been so cour-
teous and gentlemanly. He’d been her first pickup.
    When she walked in on Dad and the boys at breakfast
a sunny winter morning two days later, my, weren’t they
                 Dad tried to scold her, but Daughter could see
surprised 3
that he was as pleased as she was. Anyway, she didn’t care,

it was so good to be home.
   After Christmas she and Dad and the boys went for a
week’s hunting down near Corpus Christi and had the time
of their lives and Daughter shot her first deer. When they
got back to Dallas Daughter said she wasn’t going back to
be finished but that what she would like to do was go up
to New York to stay with Ada Washburn, who was study-
ing at Columbia, and to take courses where she’d really
learn something. Ada was Joe Washburn’s sister, an old
maid but bright as a dollar and was working for her Ph.D
in Education. It took a lot of arguing because Dad had set
his heart on having Daughter go to a finishing school but
she finally convinced him and was off again to New York.
    She was reading Les MisSrables all the way up on the
train and looking out at the greyishbrownish winter land-
scape that didn’t seem to have any life to it after she left
the broad hills of Texas, pale green with winter wheat and

alfalfa, feeling more and more excited and scared as hout
by hour she got nearer New York. There was a stout

699
motherly woman who’d lost her husband who got on the
tram at Little Rock and wouldn’t stop talking about the
dangers and pitfalls that beset a young woman’s path in
big cities. She kept such a strict watch on Daughter that
she never got a chance to talk to the interesting looking
young man with the intense black eyes who boarded the
train at St. Louis and kept going over papers of some kind
he had in a brown briefcase. She thought he looked a little

like Joe Washburn. At last when they were crossing New
Jersey and there got to be more and more factories and
grimy industrial towns, Daughter’s heart got to beating so
fast she couldn’t sit still but kept having to go out and
stamp around in the cold raw air of the vestibule. The fat
greyheaded conductor asked her with a teasing laugh if
her beau was going to be down at the station to meet her,
she seemed so anxious to get in. They were going through
Newark then. Only one more stop. The sky was lead color
over wet streets full of automobiles and a drizzly rain was
pitting the patches of snow with grey. The train began to
cross wide desolate saltmarshes, here and there broken by
an uneven group of factory structures or a black river with

                                                                                           it
steamboats on it. There didn’t seem to be any people 5
looked so cold over those marshes Daughter felt scared
and lonely just looking at them and wished she was home.
Then suddenly the train was In a tunnel, and the porter
Was piling all the bags in the front end of the car. She got
into the fur coat Dad had bought her as a Christmas pres-
ent and pulled her gloves on over her hands cold with
excitement for fear that maybe Ada Washburn hadn’t got-
ten her telegram or hadn’t been able to come down to meet
her.
    But there she was on the platform In noseglasses and
raincoat looking as oldmaidlsh as ever and a slightly
younger girl with her who turned out to be from Waco
and studying art. They had a long ride in a taxi up crowded
streets full of slush with yellow and grey snowpiles along
         262

700
the sidewalks.      you’d have been here a week ago, Anne
Elizabeth, I declare you’d have seen a real blizzard.”
        used to think snow was like on Christmas cards,” said
Esther Wilson who was an interestinglooking girl with
black eyes and a long face and a deep kind of tragicsound-
ing voice. ‘‘But it was just an illusion like a lot of things.”
‘^New York’s no place for illusions,” said Ada sharply. “It
all looks kinder like a illusion to me,” said Daughter, look-
ing out of the window of the taxicab.
   Ada and Esther had a lovely big apartment on Univer-
sity Heights where they had fixed up the dining room as
a bedroom for Daughter, She didn’t like New York but it
                        everything was grey and grimy and the
was exciting 5
people all seemed to be foreigners and nobody paid any
attention to you except now and then a man tried to pick
you up on the street or brushed up against you in the sub-
way which was disgusting. She was signed up as a special
student and went to lectures about Economics and English
Literature and Art and talked a little occasionally with
some boy who happened to be sitting next to her, but she
was so much younger than anybody she met and she didn’t
seem to have the right line of talk to interest them. It was
fun going to matinees with Ada sometimes or riding down
all bundled up on top of the bus to go to the art-museum
with Esther on Sunday afternoons, but they were both of
them so staid and grown up and all the time getting
shocked by things she said and did.
    When Paul English called up and asked her to go to a
matinee with him one Saturday, she was very thrilled.
They’d written a few letters back and forth but they hadn’t
seen each other since Washington, She was all morning
putting on first one dress and then the other, trying out

different ways of doing her hair and was still taking a hot
bath when he called for her so that Ada had to entertain
him for the longest time. When she saw him all her thrill
dribbled away, he looked so stiff and stuckup in his dress

                                                                               263

701
uniform. First thing she knew she was kidding him, and
acting silly going downtown in the subway so that by the
time they got to the Astor where he took her to luncHj he
looked sore as a pup. She left him at the table and went
to the ladies^ room to see if she couldn^t get her hair to look
a little better than it did and got to talking with an elderly
Jewish lady in diamonds who’d lost her pocketbook, and
when she got back the lunch was standing cold on the
table and Paul English was looking at his wristwatch un-
easily, She didn’t like the play and he tried to get fresh in
the taxicab driving up Riverside Drive although it was still
broad daylight, and she slapped his face. He said she was
the meanest girl he’d ever met and she said she liked
being mean and if he didn’t like it he knew what he could
do. Before that she’d made up her mind that she’d crossed
him off her list.
    She went in her room and cried and wouldn’t take any
supper. She felt real miserable having Paul English turn
out a pill like that. It was lonely not having anybody to
take her out and no chance of meeting anybody because she
had to go everywhere with those old maids. She lay on
her back on the floor looking at the furniture from under-
neath like when she’d been little and thinking of Joe
Washburn. Ada came in and found her in the silliest posi-
tion lying on the floor with her legs in the air^ she jumped
up and kissed her all over her face and hugged her and
said she’d been a little idiot but it was all over now and
was there anything to eat in the icebox.
    When she met Edwin Vinal at one of Ada’s Sunday eve-
ning parties that she didn’t usually come out to on account
of people sitting around so prim and talking so solemn and
deep over their cocoa and cupcakes, it made everything dif-
ferent and she began to like New York. He was a scrawny
kind of young fellow who was taking courses in sociology.
He sat on a stiff chair with his cocoacup balanced uncom-
fortably in his hand and didn’t seem to know where to put
         264

702
his legs. He didn’t say anything all evening but just as he
was goingj he picked up something Ada said about values
and began to talk a blue streak, quoting all the time from
a man named Veblen. Daughter felt kind of attracted to
him and asked who Veblen was, and he began to talk to
her. She wasn’t up on what he was talking about but it
made her feel lively inside to have him talking right to her
like that. He had light hair and black eyebrows and lashes
around very pale grey eyes with little gold specks m them.
She liked his awkward lanky way of moving around. Next
evening he came to see her and brought her a volume of
the Theory of the Leisure Class and asked her if she didn’t
want to go skating with him at the St. Nicholas rink. She
went in her room to get ready and began to dawdle around
powdering her face and looking at herself in the glass*
^^Hey, Anne, for gosh sakes, we haven’t got all night,” he
yelled through the door. She had never had iceskates on
her feet before, but she knew how to rollerskate, so with
F.dwin holding her arm she was able to get around the big
hall with its band playing and all the tiers of lights and
faces around the balcony. She had more fun than she’d had
any time since she left home.
    Edwin Vinal had been a social worker and lived in a
settlement house and now he had a scholarship at Columbia
but he said the profs were too theoretical and never seemed
to realize it was real people like you and me they were
dealing with. Daughter had done churchwork and taken
around baskets to poorwhite families at Christmas time and
said she’d like to do some socialservicework right here in
 New York. As they were taking off their skates he asked
her if she really meant it and she snuled up at him and

said, ^^Hope I may die if I don’t.”
    So the next evening he took her downtown threequar-

ters of an hour’s ride in the subway and then a long stretch
 on a crosstown car to a settlement house on Grand Street
 where she had to wait while he gave an English lesson to

                                                                               265

703
a class of greasylooking young Lithuanians or Polaks or
something like that. Then they walked around the streets
and Edwin pointed out the conditions. It was like the Mex-
ican part of San Antonio or Houston only there were all
kinds of foreigners. None of them looked as if they ever
bathed and the streets smelt of garbage. There was laun-
dry hanging out everywhere and signs in all kinds of funny
languages. Edwin showed her some in Russian and Yid-
dish, one in Armenian and two in Arabic. The streets were
awful crowded and there were pushcarts along the curb
and peddlers everywhere and funny smells of cooking
coming out of restaurants, and outlandish phonograph
music. Edwin pointed out two tiredlooking painted girls
who he said were streetv/alkers, drunks stumbling out of
a saloon, a young man in a checked cap he said was a cadet
drumming up trade for a disorderly house, some sallow-
faced boys he said were gunmen and dope peddlers. It was
a relief when they came up again out of the subway way
uptown where a springy wind was blowing down the broad
empty streets that smelt of the Hudson River. ^Well,
Anne, how did you like your little trip to the underworld!^”
    ^^Allright,” she said after a pause. ^^Another time I think
ril take a gun in my handbag.     .  .  . But all those people,
Edwin, how on earth can you make citizens out of them?
We oughtn’t to let all these foreigners come over and mess
up our country.”
    “You’re entirely wrong,” Edwin snapped at her.
“They’d all be decent if they had a chance. We’d be just
like them if we hadn’t been lucky enough to be born of
decent families in small prosperous American towns.”
    “Oh, how can you talk so silly, Edwin, they’re not white
people and they never will be. They’re just like Mexicans
 or somethin’, or niggers.” She caught herself up and swal-
 lowed the last word. The colored elevator boy was drows-
 ing on a bench right behind her.
     “If you’re not the benightedest little heathen I evei
          266

704
saw,^ said Edwin teasingly. ^TouVe a Chiistian, aren’t
yoUj wellj have you ever thought that Christ was a Jew^”
   “Well, I’m failin’ down with sleep and can’t argue with
you but I know you’re wrong.” She went into the elevator
and the colored elevator boy got up yawning and stretch-
ing. The last she saw of Edwin in the rapidly decreasing
patch of light between the floor of the elevator and the
ceiling of the vestibule he was shaking his fist at her. She
threw him a kiss without meaning to.
    When she got in the apartment, Ada, who was reading
in the livingroom, scolded her a little for being so late,
but she pleaded that she was too tired and sleepy to be
scolded. “What do you think of Edwin Vinal, Ada?”
“Why, my dear, I think he’s a splendid young fellow, a
little restless maybe, but he’ll settle down.      .  .  . Why?”
    “Oh, I dunno,” said Daughter, yawning, “Good night,
Ada darlin’.”
    She took a hot bath and put a lot of perfume on and
went to bed, but she couldn’t go to sleep. Her legs ached
 from the greasy pavements and she could feel the walls
 of the tenements sweating lust and filth and the smell of
 crowded bodies closing in on her, in spite of the perfume
 she still had the rank garbagy smell in her nose, and the
 dazzle of street lights and faces pricked her eyes. When
 she went to sleep she dreamed she had rouged her lips and
 was walking up and down, up and down with a gun in her
 handbags Joe Washburn walked by and she kept catching
 at his arm to try to make him stop but he kept walking by
 without looking at her and so did Dad and they wouldn’t
 look when a big Jew with a beard kept getting closer to
 her and he smelt horrid of the East Side and garlic and
 waterclosets and she tried to get the gun out of her bag
 to shoot him and he had his arms around her and was pull-
 ing her face close to his. She couldn’t get the gun out of
 the handbag and behind the roaring clatter of the subway

  in her ears was Edwin Vinal’s voice saying, “You’re h

                                                                                267

705
Chnstiarij aren’t you? You’re entirely wrong ... a Chris-

tian, aren’t you? Have you ever thought that Christ would
have been just like them if he hadn’t been lucky enough

to have been born of decent people ... a Christian, aren’t
you.  . .
   Ada, standing over her in a nightgown, woke her up,
*"What can be the matter, child?” was having a night-
mare .  . . isn’t that silly?” said Daughter and sat bolt-
upright in bed. ^^Did I yell bloody murder?”             bet you
children were out eating Welsh Rabbit, that’s why you
were so late,” said Ada, and went back to her room
laughing.
   That spring Daughter coached a girls’ basketball team
at a Y.W.C.A. in the Bronx, and got engaged to Edwin
Vinal. She told him she didn’t want to marry anybody for
a couple of years yet, and he said he didn’t care about car-
nal marriage but that the important thing was for them to
plan a life of service together. Sunday evenings, when the
weather got good, they would go and cook a steak together
in Palisades Park and sit there looking through the trees
at the lights coming on in the great toothed rockrim of the
city and talk about what was good and evil and what real
love was. Coming back they’d stand hand in hand in the
bow of the ferry boat among the crowd of boyscouts and
hikers and picnickers and look at the great sweep of
lighted buildings fading away into the ruddy haze down
the North River and talk about all the terrible conditions
in the city. Edwin would kiss her on the forehead when
he said Goodnight and she’d go up in the elevator feeling
that the kiss was a dedication.
    At the end of June she went home to spend three months
on the ranch, but she was very unhappy there that summer.
Somehow she couldn’t get around to telling Dad about her
engagement. When Joe Washburn came out to spend a
week the boys made her furious teasing her about him and
telling her that he was engaged to a girl in Oklahoma City,
         268

706
and she got sc maa she wouldn’t speak to them and wa&
barely civil to Joe, She insisted on riding a mean little
pinto that bucked and threw her once or twice. She drove
the car right through a gate one night and busted both
lamps to smithereens. When Dad scolded her about her
recklessness she’d tell him he oughtn’t to care because she
was going back east to earn her own living and he’d be rid
of her. Joe Washburn treated her with the same grave
kindness as always^ and sometimes when she was acting
crazy she’d catch a funny understanding bdding gleam in
his keen eyes that would make her feel suddenly all weak
and silly inside. The night before he left the boys cornered
a rattler on the rockpile behind the corral and Daughter
dared Joe to pick it up and snap its head off. Joe ran for
a forked stick and caught the snake with a jab behind the
head and threw it with all his might against the wall of
the little smokehouse. As it lay wriggling on the grass
with a broken back Bud took its head off with a hoe. It
had six rattles and a button. ^^Daughter,” Joe drawled,
looking her in the face with his steady smiling stare,
‘^sometimes you talk like you didn’t have good sense.”
     You’re yaller, that’s what’s the matter with you,” she
said.
   “Daughter, you’re crazy . . . you apologize to Joe,”
yelled Bud, running up red in the face with the dead snake
in his hand. She turned and went into the ranchhou-se and
threw herself on her bed. She didn’t come out of her room
till after Joe had left in the morning.
   The week before she left to go back to Columbia she
was good as gold and tried to make it up to Dad and the
boys by baking cakes for them and attending to the house-
keeping for having acted so mean and crazy all summer.
She met Ada in Dallas and they engaged a section to-
gether. She’d been hoping that Joe would come down to
the station to see them off, but he was in Oklahoma City
on oil business. On her way north she wrote him a long

                                                                              269

707
letter saying she didn’t know what had gotten into her that
day with the rattler and wouldn’t he please forgive her.
   Daughter worked hard that autumn. She’d gotten her-

self admitted to the School of Journalism, in spite of Ed-
win’s disapproval. He wanted her to study to be a teacher
or social worker, but she said journalism offered more op-
                                                                               although
portunity. They more or less broke off over it 5
they saw each other a good deal, they didn’t talk so much
about being engaged. There was a boy named Webb Cruth-
ers studying journalism that Daughter got to be good
friends with although Ada said he was no good and
wouldn’t let her bring him to the house. He was shorter
than she, had dark hair and looked about fifteerx although
he said he was twentyone. He had a creamy white skin
that made people call him Babyface, and a funny confiden-

tial way of talking as if he didn’t take what he was saying
altogether seriously himself. He said he was an anarchist
and talked all the time about politics and the war. He used
to take her down to the East Side, too, but it was more fun
than going with Edwin. Webb always wanted to go in
somewhere to get a drink and talk to people. He took her
to saloons and to Roumanian rathskellers and Arabian res-
taurants and more places than she’d ever imagined. He
knew everybody everywhere and seemed to manage to
make people trust him for the check, because he hardly
ever had any money, and when they’d spent whatever she
 had with her Webb would have to chargethe rest. Daugh-
ter didn’t drink more than an occasional glass of wine, and
 if he began to get too obstreperous, she’d make him take
 her to the nearest subway and go on home. Then next day
 he’d be a little weak and trembly and tell her about his
 hangover and funny stories about adventures he’d had
 when he was tight. He always had pamphlets in his pock-
 ets about socialism and syndicalism and copies of Mother
 Earth or The Masses,
     After Christmas Webb got all wrapped up in a strike of
          270

708
textile workers that was going on in a town over in New
Jersey. One Sunday they went over to see what it was like.
They got off the train at a grimy brick station in the mid-
dle of the empty business section, a few people standing
around in front of lunchcounters, empty stores closed for
Sundays there seemed nothing special about the town until
they walked out to the long low square brick buildings of
the mills. There were knots of policemen in blue standing
about in the wide muddy roadway outside and inside the
wiremesh gates huskylooking young men in khaki. ^^Those
are special deputies, the sons of bitches,” muttered Webb
between his teeth. They went to Strike Headquarters to see
a girl Webb knew who was doing publicity for them. At
the head of a grimy stairway crowded with greyfaced for-
eign men and women in faded greylooking clothes, they
found an ofHce noisy with talk and click of typewriters. The
hallway was piled with stacks of handbills that a tiredlook^
ing young man was giving out in packages to boys in
ragged sweaters. Webb found Sylvia Dalhart, a longnosed
 girl with glasses who was typing madly at a desk piled
with newspapers and clippings. She waved a hand and said,
 ^Webb, wait for me outside. I^m going to show some news-
 paper guys around and you’d better come.”
     Out in the hall they ran into a fellow Webb knew, Ben
 Compton, a tall young man with a long thin nose and red-
 rimmed eyes, who said he was going to speak at the meet-
 ing and asked Webb if he wouldn’t speak. ^^Jeez, what
 could I say to those fellers? I’m just a bum of a college
 stoodjent, like you, Ben.” ^^Tell ’em the workers have got
 to win the world, tell ’em this fight is part of a great his-
 toric battle. Talking’s the easiest part of the movement.
 The truth’s simple enough.” He had an explosive way of
 talking with a pause between each sentence, as if the sen-
 tence took sometime to come up from someplace way down
 inside. Daughter sized up that he was attractive, even
 though V was probably a Jew. ‘‘Well, I’ll try to stammer

                                                                               171

709
      something about democracy in industry,” said Webb.
   Sylvia Dalhart was already pushing them down the

stairs. She had with her a pale young man in a raincoat
and black felt hat who was chewing the end of a half of
a cigar that had gone out. ^Tellowworkers, this is Joe Big-
low from the Globe^^ she had a western burr in her voice
that made Daughter feel at home. ^WeVe going to show
him around.”
   They went all over town, to strikers’ houses where tired-
looking women in sweaters out at the elbows were cooking
up lean Sunday dinners of corned beef and cabbage or
stewed meat and potatoes, or in some houses they just had
cabbage and bread or just potatoes. Then they went to a
lunchroom near the station and ate some lunch. Daughter
paid the check as nobody seemed to have any money, and

it was time to go to the meeting.
   The trolleycar was crowded with strikers and their wives
and children. The meeting was to be held in the next town
because in that town the Mills owned everything and there
was no way of hiring a hall. It had started to sleet, and
they got their feet wet wading through the slush to the
mean frame building w^here the meeting was going to be
held. When they got to the door there were mounted po-
lice out in front. ^^Hall full,” a cop told them at the street-
corner, ^hio more allowed inside.”
    They stood around in the sleet waiting for somebody
with authority. There were thousands of strikers, men and
women and boys and girls, the older people talking among
themselves m low voices in foreign languages. Webb kept
saying, Jesus, this is outrageous. Somebody ought to do
something.” Daughter’s feet were cold and she wanted to
go home.
    Then Ben Compton came around from the back of the
building. People began to gather around him, ^^There’s
Ben  . . . there’s Compton, good boy, Benny,” she heard
people saying. Young men moved around through the
         272

710
crowd whispering, “Overflow meeting . .        , stand your
ground, folks.’^
    He began to speak hanging by one arm from a lamp-
post. “Comrades, this is another insult flung in the face of
the working class. There are not more than forty people in
the hall and they close the doors and tell us ids full .    .
The crowd began swaying back and forth, hats, umbrellas
bobbing in the sleety rain. Then she saw the two cops were
dragging Compton off and heard the jangle of the patrol-
wagon. “Shame, shame,” people yelled. They began to
back off from the copsj the flow was away from the hall.
People were moving quietly and dejectedly down the street
toward the trolley tracks with the cordon of mounted po-
lice pressing them on. Suddenly Webb whispered in her
ear, “Let me lean on your shoulder,” and jumped on a
hydrant.
    “This is outrageous,” he shouted, “you people had a per-
mit to use the hall and had hired it and no power on earth
has a right to keep you out of it. To hell with the cossacks.”
    Two mounted police were loping towards him, opening
a lane through the crowd as they came. Webb was off the
 hydrant and had grabbed Daughter's hand, “Let^s run like
 hell,” he whispered and was off doubling back and forth
 among the scurrying people. She followed him laughing
 and out of breath. A trolley car was coming down the main
 street. Webb caught it on the move but she couldn^t make

 it and had to wait for the next. Meanwhile the cops were
 riding slowly back and forth among the crowd breaking

 it up.
     Daughter's feet ached from paddling in slush all after-
 noon and she was thinking that she ought to get home be-
 fore she caught her death of cold. At the station waiting

 for the train she saw Webb. He looked scared to death.
 He’d pulled his cap down over his eyes and his muffler up
 over his chin and pretended not to know Daughter when
                                                                               m

711
she went up to him. Once they got on the overheated train
he sneaked up the aisle and sat down next to her.
        was afraid some dick ud recognize me at the station,^’
he whispered. ^^Wellj what do you think of it^^^
         thought it was terrible . . . they^re all so yaller

. . . the only people looked good to me were those boys
guardin’ the mills, they looked like white men. . . . And
as for you, Webb Cruthers, you ran like a deer.”
    ^^Don’t talk so loud. ... Do you think I ought to have
waited and gotten arrested like Ben.”
    ^^Of course it’s none of my business.”
    "^You don’t understand revolutionary tactics, Anne.”
    Going over on the ferry they were both of them cold
and hungry. Webb said he had the key to a room a friend
of his had down on Eighth Street and that they’d better
go there and warm their feet and make some tea before
they went uptown. They had a long sullen walk, neither of
them saying anything, from the ferry landing to the house.
The room, that smelt of turpentine and was untidy, turned
out to be a big studio heated by a gasburner. It was cold
as Greenland, so they wrapped themselves in blankets and
took off their shoes and stockings and toasted their feet in
front of the gas. Daughter took her skirt off under the
blanket and hung it up over the heater. “Well, I declare,”
she said, “if your friend comes in we sure will be compro-
mised.”
    “He won’t,” said Webb, “he’s up a^ Cold Spring for
the weekend.” Webb was moving around in his bare feet,
putting on water to boil and making toast. “You’d better
take your trousers off, Webb, I can see the water dripping
off them from here.” Webb blushed and pulled them off,
draping the blanket around himself like a Roman senator.
    For a long time they didn’t say anything and all they
could hear above the distant hum of traffic was the hiss of
 the gasflame and the intermittent purr of the kettle just
beginning to boil. Then Webb suddenly began to talk
         274

712
a nervous spluttering way.         you think Pm yellow, do
you? Well, you may be right, ^ime ... not that I give
a damn ... I mean, you see, there’s times when a fellow
ought to be a coward and times when he ought to do the
he-man stuff. Now don’t talk for a minute, let me say
something.  . . . I’m hellishly attracted to you . .          . and
it’s been yellow of me not to tell you about it before, see?
I don’t believe in love or anything like that, all bourgeois
                 but I think when people
nonsense 5                                        are attracted to each
other I think it’s yellow of them not to . .            . you know
what I mean.”
    ^^No, I doan’, Webb,” said Daughter after a pause.
    Webb looked at her in a puzzled way as he brought her
a cup of tea and some buttered toast with a piece of cheese
on it. They ate in silence for a while, it was so quiet they
could hear each other gulping little swallows of tea. ^^Now,
 what in Jesus Christ’s name did you mean by that?” Webb
suddenly shouted out.
    Daughter felt warm and drowsy in her blanket, with the
 hot tea in her and the dry gasheat licbng the soles of her
 feet. “Well, what does anybody mean by anything,” she
 mumbled dreamily.
     Webb put down his teacup and began to walk up and
 down the room trailing the blanket after him. “S—t,” he
 suddenly said, as he stepped on a thumbtack. He stood on
 one leg looking at the sole of his foot that was black from
                                                                                       peo-
 the grime of the floor. “But, Jesus Christ, Anne . . .
 ple ought to be free and happy about sex . . . come ahead
 let’s.” His cheeks were pink and his black hair that needed
 cutting was every which way. He kept on standing on one
 leg and looking at the sole of his foot. Daughter began to
  laugh, “You look awful funny like that, Webb.” She felt
  a warm glow all over her. “Give me another cup of tea
  and make me some more toast.”
     After she’d had the tea and toast she said, “Well, isn’t

  it about time we ought to be going uptown?” “But Christ,

                                                                                275

713
Anne, Pm mabng indecent proposals to you,” he said

shrilly, half laughing and half in tears. “For God^s sake
pay attention , . « Damn it, Fll make you pay attention,
you little bitch.” He dropped his blanket and ran at her.
She could see he was fighting mad. He pulled her up out
of her chair and kissed her on the mouth. She had quite a
tussle with him, as he was wiry and strong, but she man-
aged to get her forearm under his chin and to push his
face away far enough to give him a punch on the nose.
His nose began to bleed. “Donh be silly, Webb,” she said,
breathing hard, “I don^t want that sort of thing, not yet,
anyway ... go and wash your face.”
    He went to the sink and began dabbling his face with
water. Daughter hurried into her skirt and shoes and stock-
ings and went over to the sink where he was washing his
face, “That was mean of me, Webb, Fm terribly sorry.
There’s something always makes me be mean to people I
like.” Webb wouldn’t say anything for a long time. His
nose was still bleeding.
    “Go along home,” he said, “Fm going to stay here. . . .

It’s all right    . . . my mistake.”
    She put on her dripping raincoat and went out into the
shiny evening streets. All the way home on the express in
the subway she was feeling warm and tender towards
Webb, like towards Dad or the boys.
    She didn’t see him for several days, then one evening
he called and asked her if she wanted to go out on the
picket line next morning. It was still dark when she met
him at the ferry station. They were both cold and sleepy
and didn’t say much going out on the train. From the train
they had to run through the slippery streets to get to the
tnills in time to join the picket line. Faces looked cold and
pinched in the blue early light. Women had shawls over
their heads, few of the men or boys had overcoats. The
young girls were all shivering in their cheap fancy topcoats
that had no warmth to them. The cops had already begun
         276

714
to break up the head of the line. Some of the strikers were
singing SoMarity Forevery others were yelling Scabs, Scabs
and making funny long jeering hoots. Daughter was con-
fused and excited.
   Suddenly everybody around her broke and ran and left
her in a stretch of empty street in front of the wire fencing
of the mills. Ten feet in front of her a young woman
slipped and fell. Daughter caught the scared look in her
eyes that were round and black. Daughter stepped for-
ward to help her up but two policemen were ahead of her
swinging their nightsticks. Daughter thought they were
going to help the girl up. She stood still for a second,
frozen in her tracks when she saw one of the policemen’s
feet shoot out. He’d kicked the girl full in the face. Daugh-
ter never remembered what happened except that she was
wanting a gun and punching into the policeman’s big red
face and against the buttons and the thick heavy cloth of
his overcoat. Something crashed down on her head from
behind; dizzy and sick she was being pushed into the po-
licewagon. In front of her was the girl’s face all caved in
and bleeding. In the darkness inside were other men and
women cursing and laughing. But Daughter and the
woman opposite looked at each other dazedly and said
nothing. Then the door closed behind them and they were
in the dark.
    When they were committed she was charged with riot-
ing, felonious assault, obstructing an officer and inciting to
sedition. It wasn’t so bad in the county jail. The women’s
section was crowded with strikers, all the cells were full of
girls laughing and talking, singing songs and telling each
other how they’d been arrested, how long they’d been in,
how they were going to win the strike. In Daughter’s cell
the girls all clustered around her and wanted to know how
she’d gotten there. She began to feel she was quite a hero.
Towards evening her name was called and she found Webb
and Ada and a lawyer clustered around the policesergeant’s

                                                                              277

715
desk. Ada was mad, ^^Read that, young woman, and see
how thadll sound back home,” she said, poking an after-
noon paper under her nose.
   Texas Belle Assaults Cop said one headline. Then
followed an account of her knocking down a policeman
with a left on the jaw. She was released on a thousand dol-

lars bail, outside the jail, Ben Compton broke away from
the group of reporters around him and rushed up to her.
^^Congratulations, Miss Trent,” he said, ^^that was a darn
nervy thing to do . .      . made a very good impression in
the press.” Sylvia Dalhart was with him. She threw her
arms around her and kissed her: ^^That was a mighty
spunky thing to do. Say, weTe sending a delegation to
Washington to see President Wilson and present a peti-
tion and we want you on it. The President will refuse to
see the delegation and you’ll have a chance to picket the
White House and get arrested again.”
    ^Well, I declare,” said Ada when they were safely on
the tram for New York.         think you’ve lost your mind.”
  You’d have done the same thing, Ada darlm’, if you’d
seen what I saw . . . when I tell Dad and the boys about
it they’ll see red. It’s the most outrageous thing I ever
heard of.” Then she burst out crying.
    When they got back to Ada’s apartment they found a
telegram from Dad saying Coming at once. Make no state-
ment until I arnve. Late that night another telegram

            it read: Dad seriously ill come on home at once
came 5
have Ada retain best lawyer obtainable. In the morning
Daughter scared and trembling was on the first tram
south. At St. Louis she got a telegram saying DonH worry
condition fair double 'pneumonia. Upset as she was it cer-
 tainly did her good to see the wide Texas coxmtry, the
spring crops beginning, a few bluebonnets in bloom. Buster
 was there to meet her at the depot, “Well, Daughter,” he
 said after he had taken her bag, “you’ve almost killed
 Dad,”

         278

716
   Buster was sixteen and captain of the highschool ball
team. Driving her up to the house in the new Stutz he
told her how things were. Bud had been tearing things
up at the University and was on the edge of getting fired
and had gotten balled up with a girl in Galveston who was
trying to blackmail him. Dad had been very much worried
because he^d gotten in too deep in the oil game and seemg
Daughter spread all over the front page for knocking down
a cop had about finished him, old Emma was getting too
old to run the house for them anymore and it was up to
Daughter to give up her crazy icleas and stay home and
keep house for them. “See this car? A dandy ain^t it. .   .  .

I bought it myself.    .  . . Did a little tradin’ in options up
near Amarillo on my own, jus’ for the hell of it, and I
made five thousand bucks.” “Why, you smart kid. I tell
you, Bud, It’s good to be home. But about that policeman
you’d have done the same yourself or you’re not my
brother. I’ll tell you all about it sometime. Believe me it
does me good to see Texas faces after those mean weasel-
 faced Easterners.” Dr. Winslow was in the hall when they
came in. He shook hands warmly and told her how well
 she was looking and not to worry because he’d pull hei
 Dad through if it was the last thing he did on earth. The
 sickroom and Dad’s restless flushed face made her feel
 awful, and she didn’t like finding a trained nurse running
 the house.
     After Dad began to get around a little they both went
 down to Port Arthur for a couple of weeks for a change to
 stay with an old friend of Dad’s. Dad said he’d give her
 a car if she’d stay on, and that he’d get her out of this silly
 mess she’d gotten into up north.
     She began to play a lot of tennis and golf again and
 to go out a good deal socially. Joe Washburn had married
 and was living in Oklahoma getting rich on oil. She felt
                                                                   seeing him upset
 easier in Dallas when he wasn’t there 5
 her so. The next fall Daughter went down to Austin to

                                                                               279

717
finish her journalism coursej mostly because she thought
her being there would keep Bud in the straight and nar-
row. Friday afternoons they drove back home together in
her Buick sedan for the weekend. Dad had bought a new
Tudor style house way out and all her spare time was
taken up picking out furniture and hanging curtains and
arranging the rooms. She had a great many beaux always
coming around to take her out and had to start keeping an
engagement book. Especially after the declaration of war
social life became very hectic. She was going every minute
and never got any sleep. Everybody was getting commis-
sions or leaving for officers training camps. Daughter went
in for Red Cross work and organized a canteen^ but that
wasn^t enough and she kept applying to be sent abroad.
Bud went down to San Antonio to learn to fly and Buster,
whoM been in the militia, lied about his age and joined up
as a private and was sent to Jefferson Barracks. At the can-
teen she lived in a whirl and had one or two proposals of
marriage a week, but she always told them that she hadn’t
any intention of being a war bride.
   Then one morning a War Department telegram came.
Dad was in Austin on business so she opened it. Bud had
crashed, killed. First thing Daughter thought was how
hard it would hit Dad. The phone rang^ it was a long
distance call from San Antonio, sounded like Joe Wash-
burn’s voice. ^Ts that you, Joe?” she said weakly. ^^Daugh-
ter, I want to speak to your father,” came his grave drawl.
“I know ,    . . O Joe.”
    ^Tt was his first solo flight. He was a great boy. Nobody
seems to know how it happened. Must have been defect in
structui'e. I’ll call Austin. I know where to get hold of him.

* . . I’ve got the number ... see you soon. Daughter.”
Joe rang off. Daughter went into her room and burrowed
face down into the bed that hadn’t been made up. For a
minute she tried to imagine that she hadn’t gotten up yet,
that she dreamed the phone ringing and Joe’s voice. Then
         a8o

718
she thought of Bud so sharplj/ it was as if he’d come into
the room, the way he laughed, the hard pressure of his
long thin hand over her hands when he’d suddenly
grabbed the wheel when they’d skidded going around a
corner into San Antonio the last time she’d dnven him
down after a leave, the clean anxious lean look of his face
above the tight khab collar of the uniform. Then she
heard Joe’s voice again: Must have been some defect in
structure.
   She went down and jumped into her car. At the filling-
station where she filled up with gas and oil the garageman
asked her how the boys liked it m the army. She couldn’t
stop to tell him about it now. “Bully, they like it fine,”
she said, with a grin that hurt her like a slap in the face.
She wired Dad at his lawpartner^s office that she was com-
ing and pulled out of town for Austin. The roads were in
bad shape, it made her feel better to feel the car plough
through the muddy ruts and the water spraying out in a
wave on either side when she went through a puddle at

fifty.
    She averaged fortyfive all the way and got to Austin
before dark. Dad had already gone down to San Antonio
on the tram. Dead tired, she started off. She had a blow-

                                                                          it was mid-
out and it took her a long time to get it fixed ^
night before she drew up at the Menger. Automatically
she looked at herself in the little mirror before going in.
There were streaks of mud on her face and her eyes were
red.
    In the lobby she found Dad and Joe Washburn sitting
side by side with burntout cigars in their mouths. Their
faces looked a little alike. Must have been the grey drawn
look that made them look alike. She kissed them both.
“Dad, you ought to go to bed,” she said briskly. “You
look all in.” “I suppose I might as well . . . There’s
nothing left to do,” he said.
    “Wait for me, Joe, until I get Dad fixed up,” she said

                                                                              28 r

719
in a low voice as she passed him. She went up to the room
with Dad, got herself a room adjoining, ruffled his hair and
kissed him very gently and left him to go to bed.
   When she got back down to the lobby Joe was sitting

in the same place with the same expression on his face. It
made her mad to see him like that.
    Her sharp brisk voice surprised her. ^^Come outside a
minute, Joe, I want to walk around a little.’’ The rain had
cleared the air. It was a transparent early summer night.
“Look here, Joe, who’s responsible for the condition of
the planes? I’ve got to know.” “Daughter, how funny you
talk . . . what you ought to do is get some sleep, you’re

all overwrought.” “Joe, you answer my question.” “But
Daughter, don’t you see nobody’s responsible. The army’s
a big institution. Mistakes are inevitable. There’s a lot of
money being made by contractors of one kind or another.
Whatever you say aviation is in its infancy ... we all
knew the risks before we joined up.”
    “If Bud had been killed in France I wouldn’t have felt
like this . .     . but here ... Joe, somebody’s directly re~
sponsible for my brother’s death. I want to go and talk to
 him, that’s all. I won’t do anything silly. You all think I’m
a lunatic I know, but I’m thinking of all the other girls
 who have brothers training to be aviators. The man who
 inspected those planes is a traitor to his country and ought
 to be shot down like a dog.” “Look here. Daughter,” Joe
 said as he brought her back to the hotel, “we’re fightin’ a
 war now. Individual lives don’t matter, this isn’t the time
 for lettin’ your personal feelin’s get away with you or em-
 barrassin’ the authorities with criticism. When we’ve licked
 the huns’ll be plenty of time for gettin’ the incompetents
 and the crooks .  . . that’s how I feel about it.”
     ‘^Well, good night, Joe . . . you be mighty careful
 yourself. When do you expect to get your wings?” “Oh, in
 a couple of weeks.” “How’s Gladys and Bunny?” “Oh,
                                                a funny constraint came into
  they’re all right,” said Joe 5
          28a

720
his voice and he blushed. “They’re in Tulsa with Mrs.
Higgins.”
   She went to bed and lay there without moving, feeling
                                               she was too tired to sleep.
desperately quiet and cool 5
When morning came she went around to the garage to get
her car. She felt in the pocket on the door to see if her
handbag was there that always had her little pearlhandled
revolver in it, and drove out to the aviation camp. At the
gate the sentry wouldn’t let her by, so she sent a note to
Colonel Morrissey who was a friend of Dad’s, saying that
she must see him at once. The corporal was very nice and
got her a chair in the little office at the gate and a few min-
utes later said he had Colonel Morrissey on the wire. She
started to talk to him but she couldn’t think what to say.
The desk and the office and the corporal began swaying
giddily and she fainted.
    She came to in a staffcar with Joe Washburn who was
taking her back to the hotel. He was patting her hand
saying, “That’s all right, Daughter.” She was clinging to
him and crying like a little tiny girl. They put her to bed
at the hotel and gave her bromides and the doctor wouldn’t
let her get up until after the funeral was over.
    She got a reputation for being a little crazy after that.
She stayed on in San Antonio. Everything was very ga)
and tense. All day she worked in a canteen and evenings
she went out, supper and dancing, every night with a dif-
 ferent aviation officer. Everybody had taken to drinking a
 great deal. It was like when she used to go to highschool
 dances, she felt herself moving in a brilliantly lighted daze
 of suppers and lights and dancing and champagne and dif-
 ferent colored faces and stiff identical bodies of men danc-
 ing with her, only now she had a kidding line and let them
 hug her and kiss her in taxicabs, in phonebooths, in people’s
 backyards.
     One night she met Joe Washburn at a party Ida Olsen
 was giving for some boys who were leaving for overseas.

                                                                               283

721
It was the first time she’d ever seen Joe drink. He wasn’t
drunk but she could see that he’d been drinking a great

deal. They went and sat side by side on the back steps of
the kitchen in the dark. It was a clear hot night full of
dryflies with a hard hot wind rustling the dry twigs of the

trees. Suddenly she took Joe’s hand: ^^Oh, Joe, this is
awful.”
   Joe began to talk about how unhappy he was with his
wife, how he was making big money through his oil leases
and didn’t give a damn about it, how sick he was of the
army. They’d made him an instructor and wouldn’t let
him go overseas and he was almost crazy out there in
camp, ^^Oh, Joe, I want to go overseas too. I’m leading
such a silly life here.” ‘^You have been actin’ kinder wild,
Daughter, since Bud died,” came Joe’s soft deep drawling
voice. “Oh, Joe, I wisht I was dead,” she said and put her
head on his knee and began to cry. “Don’t cry. Daughter,
don’t cry,” he began to say, then suddenly he was kissing
her. His kisses were hard and crazy and made her go ail
limp against him.
    “I don’t love anybody but you, Joe,” she suddenly said
                                                                           “Daughter,
quietly. But he already had control of himself 5
forgive me,” he said in a quiet lawyer’s voice, “I don’t
know what I was thinking of, I must be crazy .         . , this
war is making us all crazy . . . Good night . .               . Say

, , . er .      . . erase this all from the record, will you?”
    That night she couldn’t sleep a wink. At six in the morn-
ing she got into her car, filled up with gas and oil and
started for Dallas. It was a bright fall morning with blue
mist in the hollows. Dry cornstalks rustled on the long
hills red and yellow with fall. It was late when she got
home. Dad was sitting up reading the war news in pyjamas
and bathrobe. “Well, it won’t be long now, Daughter,” he
said. “The Hindenburg line is crumpling up. I knew our
boys could do it once they got started.” Dad’s face was
more lined and his hair whiter than she’d remembered it

         284

722
She heated up a can of CampbelPs soup as she hadn’t taten
any time to eat. They had a cosy little supper together and
read a funny letter of Buster’s from Camp Merritt where
his outfit was waiting to go overseas. When she went to
bed in her own room it was like being a little girl again,
she’d always loved times when she got a chance to have a
                                               she went to sleep the minute
cosy chat with Dad all alone 5
her head hit the pillow.

                                                                          it was only
   She stayed on in Dallas taking care of Dad 5
sometimes when she thought of Joe Washburn that she
felt she couldn’t stand it another minute. The fake armi-
stice came and then the real armistice, everybody was crazy
for a week like a New Orleans mardigras. Daughter de^
cided that she was going to be an old maid and keep house
for Dad. Buster came home looking very tanned and full
of army slang. She started attending lectures at Southern
Methodist, doing church work, getting books out of the
circulating library, baking angelcake^ when young girb
friends of Buster’s came to the house she acted as a chap-
eron.
    Thanksgiving Joe Washburn and his wife came to din-
ner with them. Old Emma was sick so Daughter cooked
the turkey herself. It was only when they’d all sat down
to table, with the yellow candies lighted in the silver can-
dlesticks and the salted nuts set out in the little silver trays
and the decoration of pink and purple mapleleaves, that
she remembered Bud. She suddenly began to feel faint and
ran into her room. She lay face down on the bed listening
to their grave voices. Joe came to the door to see what was
the matter. She jumped up laughing, and almost scared
Joe to death by kissing him square on the mouth. ^^I’m all
right, Joe,” she said. ^^How’s yourself?”
    Then she ran to the table and started cheering every-
body up, so that they all enjoyed their dinner. When they
were drinking their coffee in the other room she told them
that she’d signed up to go overseas for six months with the

                                                                              285

723
S^.CdT Kast Relief, that had been recruiting at Southern
Methodist. Dad was furious and Buster said she ought to
stay home now the war was over, but Daughter said, others
had given their lives to save the world from the Germans
and that she certainly could give up six months to relief
work. When she said that they all thought of Bud and
were quiet.

    It wasn’t actually true that she’d signed up, but she did
the next morning and got around Miss Frazier, a returned
missionary from China who was arranging it, so that they
sent her up to New York that week, with orders to sail
immediately with the office in Rome as her first destina-
tion, She was so wildly excited all the time she was get-
ting her passport and having her uniform fitted, she hardly
noticed how glum Dad and Buster looked. She only had a
day in New York. When the boat backed out of the dock
with its siren screaming and started steaming down the
North River, she stood on the front deck with her hair
blowing in the wind, sniffing the funny steamboat harbor
overseas smell and feeling like a twoyearold.



                                            NEWSREEL XXXII


      GOLDEN VOICE OF CARUSO SWELLS IN
 VICTORY SONG TO CROWDS ON STREETS
                        Oh Oh Ohy it^s a lovely war
                        Oo wouldn^t be a sodger^ ay

        from Pic Umbral to the north of the Stelvio it will follow
 the crest of the Rhetian alps up to the sources of the Adige and
 the Eisah passing thence by mounts Reschen and Brenner and
 the heights of Oetz and Boaller; thence south crossing Mount
 Toblach

724
                     As soon as reveille has gone
                     We feel just as ^eavy as lead
                     But we never git uf till the sergeant
                     Brings us a cuf of tea in bed
   HYPNOTIZED BY COMMON LAW WIFE
        army casualties soar to 64,305 with 318 today; 11,760
have paid the supreme sacrifice in action and 6,193       severely
wounded
                     Oh Oh Ohy it^s a lovely war
                     Oo wouldrdt he a sodger ay
                     Ohy it^s a shayme to tayke the fay

        in the villages in peasant houses the Americans are
treated as guests living in the best rooms and courteously
offered the best shining samovars or teaurns by the housewives

                     Le chef de gare il est cocu

        in the largely populated districts a spectacular touch was
given the festivities by gioups of aliens appearing in costume
and a carnival spirit prevailed

                 BRITISH SUPPRESS SOVIETS

                      Le chef de gare il est cocu
                      Qui est cocu? Le chef de gare       '

                     Sa femme elle Va voulut

        there can be no reason to believe these officers of an estab-
lished news organization serving newspapers all over the coun-
try failed to realize their responsibilities at a moment of supreme
significance to the people of this country. Even to anticipate
the event in a matter of such moment would be a grave im-
position for which those responsible must be called to account

                      Any comflaynts this morning?
                      Do we comflayn? Not we
                      Wats the matter with lumfs of onion
                      Floatin^ around in the tea?

              PEACE DOVE IN JEWELS GIVEN
                                    MRS. WILSON
                                                                                       287

725
       and the watershed of the Cols di Polberdo, Podlaniscani
^nd Idria. From this point the line turns southeast towards
^he Schneeberg, excludes the whole basin of the Saave and its
tributaries. From Schneeberg it goes down to the coast m
such a way as to include Castna, Mattuglia and Volusca



                              THE CAMERA EYE (38)


       sealed signed and delivered         all over Tours you

can smell lindens in bloom it’s hot my uniform sticks the
OD chafes me under the chin

       only four days ago AWOL crawling under the

freight cars at the station of St. Pierre-des-Corps waiting

in the buvette for the MP on guard to look away from

the door so’s I could slink out with a cigarette (and my

heart) in my mouth then in a tiny box of a hotel room

chaniging the date on that old movement order

       but today
       my discharge sealed signed and delivered sends off

sparks in my pocket like a romancandle

        I walk past the headquarters of the SOS Hay sojer

your tunic’s unbuttoned (f—^k you buddy) and down

the lindenshaded street to the bathhouse that has a court

with flowers in the middle of It the hot water gushes

green out of brass swanheads into the whitemetal tub

I strip myself naked soap myself all over with the sour

pink soap slide into the warm deepgreen tub through

        288

726
the white curtain in the window a finger of afternoon suiv

light lengthens on the ceiling towel’s dry and svarm

smells of steam     in the suitcase I’ve got a suit of civvies

I borrowed from a fellow I know           the buck private in

the rear rank of Uncle Sam’s Medical Corps (serial
number . . . never could remember the number anyway

I dropped it in the Loire) goes down the drain with a

gurgle and hiss and

       having amply tipped and gotten the eye from thd

fat woman who swept up the towels

       I step out into the Imdensmell of a July afternoon

and stroll up to the cafe where at the little tables outside-

only officers may set their whipcord behinds and ordei

a drink of cognac unservable to those in uniform while

waiting for the train to Paris and sit down firmly in long

pants in the iron chair

        an anonymous civilian



                                         NEWSREEL XXXIIl


  CAN’T RECALL KILLING SISTERj CLAIMS

         Pve got the blues
            Pve got the blues
                Pve got the alcohoholic blues

                SOAP CRISIS THREATENED

        with the gay sunlight and the resumption of racing Paris

 has resumed its normal life. The thousands and thousands of

                                                                              289

727
flags of all nations hang on dozens of lines stretching from
mast to mast making a fairylike effect that is positively aston-
ishing
              THREAT LETTERS REVEALED

           I love my country indeed I do
           But this war is making me blue
           I like fightin fightings my name
           But fighUn is the least about this fightin game

        the police found an anteroom full of mysteriouslooking
packages which when opened were found full of pamphlets m
Yiddish Russian and English and of membership cards for
the Industrial Workers of the World

    HIGH WIND INCREASES DANGER OE MEN

     WHILE PEACE IS TALKED OF WORLDWIDE WAR RAGES

        the agents said the arrests were ordered from the State
Department. The detention was so sudden neither of the
men had time to obtain his baggage from the vessel. Then
tame a plaintive message from two business men at Lure;
the consignment had arrived, the sacks had been opened and
their contents was ordinary building plaster. The huge car
remained suspended in some trees upside down while the pas-
sengers were thrown into the torrent twenty feet below

           Lordyy lordy^ war is hell
               Since he amputated my booze
       OUTRAGE PERPETRATED IN SEOUL

          Pve got the alcohohoholic blues

        The Department of Justice Has the Goods on the Pack-
ers According to Attorney General Palmer
        L’Ecole du Malheur Nous Rend Optimistes
         Unity of Free Peoples Will Prevent any Inequitable
Outcome of Peace of Pans

        it is only too clear that the league of nations lies in pieces
on the floor of the Hotel CriUon and the modest alliance that
might with advantage occupy its place is but a vague sketch

          290

728
HOW TO DEAL WITH BOLSHEVISTS? SHOOT
THEM' POLES’ WAY' Hamburg Crowds Flock to
See Ford

 HINTS AT BIG POOL TO DEVELOP ASIA
          When Mr. Hoover said to cut our eattn down
         1 did it and I didrdt ever raise a jrown
          Then when he said to cut out coal^
         But now he^s cut right into my soul

        Allons-nous Assister a la Panique des Sots?
       stones were clattering on the roof and crashing through
the windows and wild men were shocking through the key-
hole while enormous issues depended on them that required
calm and deliberation at any rate the President did not speak
to the leaders of the democratic movements
LIEBKNECHT KILLED ON WAY TO PRISON



                                     EVELINE HUTCHINS


    Eveline had moved to a little place on the rue de Bussy
where there was a street market every day. Eleanor to show
that there was no hard feeling had given her a couple of
her Italian painted panels to decorate the dark parlor
with. In early November rumors of an armistice began to

fly around and then suddenly one afternoon Major Wood
ran into the ofiice that Eleanor and Eveline shared and
dragged them both away from their desks and kissed them
both and shouted, ^^At last iPs come.” Before she knew

it Eveline found herself kissing Major Moorehouse right
on the mouth. The Red Cross ofiice turned into a college
dormitory the night of a football victory: it was the Armi-

stice.
    Everybody seemed suddenly to have bottles of cognac

                                                                              291

729
and to be singing, There^s a long long trail awinding or
ha MadeUlon four nous rdest fas sevhe.
   She and Eleanor and J.W. and Major Wood were in
a taxicab going to the Cafe de la Paix.
    For some reason they kept getting out of taxicabs and
other people kept getting In. They had to get to the Cafe
de ia Paix but whenever they got into a taxicab it was
stopped by the crowd and the driver disappeared. But
when they got there they found every table filled and files
of people singing and dancing streaming in and out all
the doors. They were Greeks, Polish leglonaires, Russians,
Serbs, Albanians in white kilts, a Highlander with bag-
pipes and a lot of girls In Alsatian costume. It was annoy-
ing not being able to find a table. Eleanor said maybe
they ought to go somewhere else. J.W. was preoccupied
and wanted to get to a telephone.
    Only Major Wood seemed to be enjoying himself. He
Was a greyhaired man with a little grizzled mustache and
kept saying, ^^Ah, the lid^s off today.” He and Eveline
went upstairs to see if they could find room there and ran
into two Anzacs seated on a billiard table surrounded by a
dozen bottles of champagne. Soon they were all drinking
champagne with the Anzacs. They couldn’t get anything
to eat although Eleanor said she was starving and when
J.W. tried to get into the phone booth he found an Italian
officer and a girl tightly wedged together In it. The Anzacs
Were pretty drunk, and one of them was saying that the
Armistice was probably just another bloody piece of lying
                      so Eleanor suggested they try to go back to
propaganda j
her place to have something to eat. J.W. said yes, they
could stop at the Bourse so that he could send some cables.
He must get In touch with his broker. The Anzacs didn’t
like it when they left and were rather rude.
    They stood around for a long time in front of the opera
in the middle of swirling crowds. The streetlights were on;
 the grey outlines of the opera were edged along the cor*

         292

730
nices with shimmering gas flames. They were jostled and
                                                                                     occa-
pushed about. There were no busses, no automobiles j
sionally they passed a taxicab stranded in the crowd like
a rock in a stream. At last on a side street they found them-
selves alongside a Red Cross staffcar that had nobody in it.
The driver, who wasn^t too sober, said he was trying to
get the car back to the garage and said he’d take them
down to the quai de la Tournelle first.
    Eveline was just climbing in when somehow she felt

it was just too tiresome and she couldn’t. The next minute
she was marching arm in arm with a little French sailor
in a group of people mostly in Polish uniform who were
following a Greek flag and singing la Brahangonne.
    A minute later she realized she’d lost the car and her
friends and was scared. She couldn’t recognize the streets
even, in this new Paris full of arclights and flags and bands
and drunken people. She found herself dancing with the
little sailor in the asphalt square in front of a church with
two towers, then with a French colonial officer in a red
cloak, then with a Polish iegionaire who spoke a little
 English and had lived in Newark, New Jersey, and then
suddenly some young French soldiers were dancing in a
 ring around her holding hands. The game was you had
to kiss one of them to break the ring. When she caught
 on she kissed one of them and everybody clapped and
 cheered and cried Vive I’Amerique. Another bunch came
 and kept on and on dancing around her until she began to
 feel scared. Her head was beginning to whirl around when
 she caught sight of an American uniform on the outskirts
 of the crowd.- She broke through the ring bowling over a

 little fat Frenchman and fell on the doughboy’s neck and
 kissed him, and everybody laughed and cheered and cried
                                                        the man with him was
 encore. He looked embarrassed 5
 Paul Johnson, Don Stevens’ friend. “You see I had to

 kiss somebody,” Eveline said blushing. The doughboy
 laughed and looked pleased.
                                                                               m

731
             I hope you didn’t mindj Miss Hutchins, I hope
you don’t mind this crowd and everything,” apologized
Paul Johnson.
   People spun around them dancing and shouting and she
had to kiss Paul Johnson too before they’d let them go.
He apologized solemnly again and said, ^^Isn’t it wonder-
ful to be in Pans to see the armistice and everything, if
you don’t mind the crowd and everything . . . but hon-
estly, Miss Hutchins, they’re awful goodnatured. No fights
or nothin’   . . . Say, Don’s in this cafe.”
    Don was behind a little zinc bar in the entrance to the
tafe shaking up cocktails for a big crowd of Canadian and
Anzac officers all very drunk. “I can’t get him out of
there,” whispered Paul. ^^He’s had more than he ought.”
They got Don out from behind the bar. There seemed
to be nobody there to pay for the drinks. In the door he
pulled off his grey cap and cried, ^^Vive les quakers . . .
a bas la guerre,” and everybody cheered. They roamed
around aimlessly for a while, now and then they’d be
stopped by a ring of people dancing around her and Don
would kiss her. He was noisy drunk and she didn’t like
the way he acted as if she was his girl. She began to feel
tired by the time they got to the place de la Concorde
and suggested that they cross the river and try to get to
her apartment where she had some cold veal and salad.
    Paul was embarrassedly saying perhaps he’d better not
tome, when Don ran off after a group of Alsatian girls
who were hopping and skipping up the Champs Elysees.
^^Now you’ve got to come,” she said. ^To keep me from
being kissed too much by strange men.”
    ^^But Miss Hutchins, you mustn’t think Don meant any-
thing running off like that. He’s very excitable, especially
when he drinks.” She laughed and they walked on with-
 out saying anything more.
    When they got to her apartment the old concierge
 hobbled out from her box and shook hands with both of

         294

732
them,           madamCj c’est la victoire,” she said, ^^but it
won’t make my dead son come back to life, will it?” For
some reason Eveline could not think of anything to do but
give her five francs and she went back muttering a sing-
song, ^^Merci, m’sieur, madame.”
    Up in Eveline’s tiny rooms Paul seemed terribly em-
barrassed. They ate everything there was to the last crumb
of stale bread and talked a httle vaguely, Paul sat on the
edge of his chair and told her about his travels back and
forth with despatches. He said how wonderful it had been
for him coming abroad and seeing the army and European
cities and meeting people like her and Don Stevens and
that he hoped she didn’t mind his not knowing much about
all the things she and Don talked about. ^Tf this really is
the beginning of peace I wonder what we’ll all do, Miss
Hutchins.” “Oh, do call me Eveline, Paul.” “I really dc
think it is the peace, Eveline, according to Wilson’s Four-
teen Points. I think Wilson’s a great man myself in epite
of all Don says, I know he’s a darn sight cleverer than I
am, but still . . . maybe this is the last war there’ll ever
be. Gosh, think of that . . .” She hoped he’d kiss her w’-hen
 he left but all he did was shake hands awkwardly and say

 all in a breath, “I hope you won’t mind if I come to see
you next time I can get to Paris.”




    For the Peace Conference, J.W. had a suite at the
 Crillon, with his blonde secretary Miss Williams at a desk
 in a little anteroom, and Morton his English valet serving
 tea in the late afternoon. Eveline liked dropping into the
 Crillon late In the afternoon after walking up the arcades
 of the rue de Rivoli from her office. The antiquated cor-
 ridors of the hotel were crowded with Americans coming
 and going. In J.W.’s big salon there’d be Morton stealthily
 handing around tea, and people In uniform and In frock

                                                                              295

733
coats and the cigarettesmoky air would be full of halftold

.anecdotes. J.W. fascinated her, dressed in grey Scotch
Iweeds that always had a crease on the trousers (he^d
                                                                                      with
given up wearing his Red Cross major^s uniform) ^
such an aloof agreeable manner, tempered by the pre-
Dccupied look of a very busy man always being called up
Dn the phone, receiving telegrams or notes from his secre-

tar}^, disappearing into the embrasure of one of the win-
dows that looked out on the place de la Concorde with
someone for a whispered conversation, or being asked to
                                                                               and still
step in to see Colonel House for a moment j
when he handed her a champagne cocktail just before they
all went out to dinner on nights he didn’t have to go to
some official function, or asked if she wanted another cup
of tea, she’d feel for a second In her eyes the direct glance
of two boyish blue eyes with a funny candid partly hu-
morous look that teased her. She wanted to know him
            Eleanor, she felt, watched them like a cat watching
better j
a mouse. After all, Eveline kept saying to herself, she
hadn’t any right. It wasn’t as If there was anything really
between them.
    When J.W. was busy they often went out with Edgar
Robbins who seemed to be a sort of assistant of J.W.’s.
Eleanor couldn’t abide him, said there was something In-
sulting in his cynicism, but Eveline liked to hear him talk.
He said the peace was going to be ghastlier than the war,
said it was a good thing nobody ever asked his opinion
about anything because he’d certainly land in jail if he
gave it. Robbins’ favorite hangout was Freddy’s up back
of Montmartre. They’d sit there all evening in the small
smokycrowded rooms while Freddy, who had a big white
beard like Walt Whitman, would play on the guitar and
sing. Sometimes he’d get drunk and set the company up
to drinks on the house. Then his wife, a cross woman who
looked like a gypsy, would come out of the back room
and curse and scream at him. People at the tables would

         296

734
get up and recite long poems about La Grand’ route. La
Misere, L’Assassinat or sing old French songs like Les
FMes dd Ncintes, If it went over everybody present would
clap hands in unison. They called that giving a bon.
Freddy got to know them and would make a great fuss
when they arrived, ^'Ah, les belles Americames.” Robbins
would sit there moodily drinking calvados after calvados,
now and then letting out a crack about the day’s happen-
ings at the peace conference. He said that the place was a
fake that the calvados was wretched and that Freddy was
a dirty old bum, but for some reason he always wanted
to go back.
    J.W. went there a couple of times, and occasionally
they’d take some delegate from the peace conference who’d
be mightily impressed by their knowledge of the inner
life of Pans. J.W. was enchanted by the old French songs,
but he said the place made him feel itchy and that he
thought there were fleas there. Eveline liked to watch him
when he was listening to a song with his eyes half closed
and his head thrown back. She felt that Robbins didn’t
appreciate the rich potentialities of his nature and always
shut him up when he started to say something sarcastic
about the big cheese, as he called him. She thought it was
disagreeable of Eleanor to laugh at things like that, espe-
cially when J.W. seemed so devoted to her.
    When Jerry Burnham came back from Armenia and
                                                                                   Ward
found that Eveline was going around with J,
Moorehouse all the time he was terribly upset. He took
her out to lunch at the Medicis Grill on the left bank
and talked and talked about it.
    “Why, Eveline, I thought of you as a person who
wouldn’t be taken in by a big bluff like that. The guy’s
 nothing but a goddam megaphone. . . . Honestly, Eve-

 line, It’s not that I expect you to fall for me, I know very
 well you don’t give a damn about me and why should

 you.^ .  . But Christ, a damn publicity agent,”

                                                                              297

735
   ^^NoWj Jerry,” said Eveline with her mouth full of hors
^i^cEUvres, ^^you know very well Pm fond of you . , , IPs
just too tiresome of you to talk like that.”
   ^^You don’t like me the way Pd like you to . . . but
to hell with that . . . Have wine or beer?”
    ^^You pick out a nice Burgundy, Jerry, to warm us up
a little. . . . But you wrote an article about J.W. your-
self ... I saw it reprinted in that column in the Herald,^^
   “Go ahead, rub it in . . . Christ, I swear, Eveline, I’m
going to get out of this lousy trade and . . . that was all
plain oldfashioned bushwa and I thought you’d have had
the sense to see it. Gee, this is good sole.”
    ^^Delicious . . . but, Jerry, you’re the one ought to
have more sense.”
    “1 dunno I thought you were different from other
upperclass women, made your own living and all that.”
    ^^Let’s not wrangle, Jerry, let’s have some fun, here
we are in Paris and the war’s over and it’s a fine wintry
day and everybody’s here. . . .”
    ^War over, my eye,” said Jerry rudely. Eveline thought
he was just too tiresome, and looked out the window at
the ruddy winter sunlight and the old Medici fountain and
the delicate violet lacework of the bare trees behind the
high iron fence of the Luxemburg Garden. Then she
looked at Jerry’s red intense face with the turnedup nose
and the crisp boyishly curly hair that was beginning to turn
a little grey; she leaned over and gave the back of his
hand a couple of little pats.
    “1 understand, Jerry, you’ve seen things that I haven’t
imagined ... I guess it’s the corrupting influence of the
Red Cross.”
    He smiled and poured her out some more wine and said
with a sigh:
      You’re the most damnably attractive woman I ever
met, Eveline . . . but like all women what you worship
is power, when money’s the main thing it’s money, when
         298

736
it’s fame it’s famC;, when It’s art, you’re a goddamned art-
lover ... I guess I’m the same, only I kid myself more.”
    Eveline pressed her lips together and didn’t say any-
thing. She suddenly felt cold and frightened and lonely
and couldn’t think of anything to say. Jerry gulped down
a glass of wine and started talking about throwing up his
job and going to Spain to write a book. He said he didn’t
pretend to have any selfrespect, but that being a news-
paper correspondent was too damn much nowadays. Eve-
line said she never wanted to go back to America, she felt
life would be just too tiresome there after the war.
    When they’d had their coffee they walked through the
gardens. Near the senate chamber some old gentlemeti
were playing croquet in the last purphsh patch of after-
noon sunlight. ^^Oh, I think the French are wonderful,”
said Evehne. “Second childhood,” growled Jerry. They
rambled aimlessly round the streets, reading palegreen
yellow and pink theatre notices on kiosks, looking into
windows of antiqueshops. “We ought both to be at our
offices,” said Jerry. “I’m not going back,” said Eveline,
“I’ll call up and say I have a cold and have gone home to
bed ... I think I’ll do that anyway.” “Don’t do that,

let’s play hookey and have a swell time.” They went to
the cafe opposite St. Germain-des-Pres. When Eveline
came back from phoning, Jerry had bought her a bunch of
violets and ordered cognac and seltzer. “Eveline, let’s
celebrate,” he said, “I think I’ll cable the sonsobitches and
tell ’em I’ve resigned.” “Do you think you ought to do
that, Jerry? After all it’s a wonderful opportunity to see
the peace conference and everything.”
    After a few minutes she left him and walked home.
She wouldn’t let him come with her. As she passed the
window where they’d been sitting she looked in; he was
ordering another drink.
    On the rue de Bussy the market was very jolly under the
gaslights. It all smelt of fresh greens, and butter and

                                                                              299

737
cheese. She bought some rolls for breakfast and a few little
cakes in case somebody came in to tea. It was cosy in her

little pink and white salon with the fire of brickettes going
in the grate. Eveline wrapped herself up in a steamerrug
and lay down on the couch.
    She was asleep when her bell jingled. It was Eleanor
and J.W. come to inquire how she was. J.W. was free
tonight and wanted them to come to the opera with him
to see Castor and Pollux. Eveline said she was feeling
terrible but she thought she’d go just the same. She put
on some tea for them and ran into her bedroom to dress.
She felt so happy she couldn’t help humming as she sat
at her dressingtable looking at herself in the glass. Her
skin looked very white and her face had a quiet mysterious
look she liked. She carefully put on very little lipstick and
                                                           her hair worried her,
drew her hair back to a knot behind 5
                                                                                        for
it wasn’t curly and didn’t have any particular color j
a moment she thought she wouldn’t go. Then Eleanor
came in with a cup of tea in her hand telling her to hurry
because they had to go down and wait while she dressed
herself and that the opera started early. Eveline didn’t
have any real evening wrap so she had to wear an old
rabbitfur coat over her eveningdress. At Eleanor’s they
found Robbins waitings he wore a tuxedo that looked a
little the worse for wear. J.W. was in the uniform of a
Red Cross major. Eveline thought he must have been
exercising, because his jowl didn’t curve out from the tight
high collar as much as it had formerly.
    They ate in a hurry at Poccardi’s and drank a lot of
badly made Martinis. Robbins and J.W. were in fine
feather, and kept them laughing all the time. Eveline
understood now why they worked together so well. At
the opera, where they arrived late, it was wonderful,
glittering with chandeliers and uniforms. Miss Williams,
J.W.’s secretary, was already in the box. Eveline thought
how nice he must be to work for, and for a moment bit-

        300

738
terly envied Miss Williams, even to her peroxide hair and
her brisk chdly manner of talking. Miss Williams leaned
back and said they’d missed it, that President and Mrs.
Wilson had just come in and had been received with a
great ovation, and Marshal Foch was there and she thought
President Poincare.
    Between the acts they worked their way as best they
could into the crowded lobby. Eveline found herself
walking up and down with Robbins, every now and then
she’d catch sight of Eleanor with J.W. and feel a little
envious.
    ‘^^They put on a better show out here than they do on
the stage,” said Robbins.
    ^^Don’t you like the production. ... I think it’s a
magnificent production.”
    “Well, I suppose looked at from the professional point
of view. . . .”

    Eveline was watching Eleanor, she was being introduced
                                                    she looked handsome this
to a French general in red pants 5
evening in her hard chilly way. Robbins tried to pilot
them in through the crowd to the little bar, but they gave

it up, there were too many people ahead of them. Robbins
started all at once to talk about Baku and the oil business.
“It’s funny as a crutch,” he kept saying, “while we sit
here wrangling under schoolmaster Wilson, John Bull’s
putting his hands on all the world’s future supplies of
               just to keep it from the bolos. They’ve got Persia
oil . . .
and the messpot and now I’ll be damned if they don’t
want Baku.” Eveline was bored and thinking to herself
that Robbins had been in his cups too much again, when
the bell rang.
    When they got back to their box a leanfaced man who
wasn’t in evening clothes was sitting in the back talking to
J.W. in a low voice. Eleanor leaned over to Eveline and
whispered in her ear, “That was General Gouraud.” The
                           Eveline found she was forgetting herself
lights went out 5
                                                                              301

739
in the deep stateliness of the music. At the next intermis-
sion she leaned over to J.W. and asked him how he liked

it. ^^Magnificentj” he said, and she saw to her surprise
that he had tears in his eyes. She found herself talking
about the music with J.W. and the man without a dress

suit, whose name was Rasmussen.
    It was hot and crowded in the tall overdecorated lobby.
Mr. Rasmussen managed to get a window open and they
went out on the balcony that opened on the serried lights
that dimmed down the avenue into a reddish glow of fog.
    “Thads the time Pd liked to have lived,” said J.W.
dreamily. “The court of the sun kingf^” asked Mr. Ras-
mussen. “No, it must have been too chilly in the winter
months and I bet the plumbing was terrible.” “Ah, it was
a glorious time,” said J.W. as if he hadn’t heard. Then he
turned to Eveline, “You’re sure you’re not catching cold

. . . you ought to have a wrap, you know.”
    “But as I was saying, Moorehouse,” said Rasmussen in

a different tone of voice, “I have positive information that
they can’t hold Baku without heavy reinforcements and
there’s no one they can get them from except from us.”
The bell rang again and they hurried to their box.
    After the opera they went to the Cafe de la Paix to
drink a glass of champagne, except for Robbins who went
off to take Miss Williams back to her hotel. Eveline and
Eleanor sat on the cushioned bench on either side of J.W.
and Mr. Rasmussen sat on a chair opposite them. He did
most of the talking, taking nervous gulps of champagne
between sentences or else running his fingers through his
spiky black hair. He was an engineer with Standard Oil.
He kept talking about Baku and Mohommarah and Mosul,
 how the Anglo-Persian and the Royal Dutch were getting
 ahead of the U.S. in the Near East and trying to foist
 off Armenia on us for a mandate, which the Turks had
 pillaged to the last blade of grass, leaving nothing but a
 lot of starving people to feed. “We’ll probably have to
         30a

740
feed 'em anyway ” said J.W. ''But my gosh, man, some-^
thing can be done about it, even if the president has so
far forgotten American interests to let himself be bull-
dozed by the British in everything, public opinion can be
aroused. We stand to lose our primacy in world oil pro-
duction.” "Oh, well, the matter of mandates isn't settled
yet.” "What's going to happen is that the British are going
to present a fait accompli to the Conference . . . findings
keepings . . . why it would be better for us for the French
to have Baku.” "How about the Russians?” asked Eveline.
"According to selfdetermination the Russians have no right
to it. The population is mostly Turkish and Armenian,'^
said Rasmussen. "But, by gorry, I'd rather have the reds
have it than the British, of course I don't suppose they'll
last long.”
    "No, I have reliable information that Lenine and
Trotsky have split and the monarchy will be restored in
Russia inside of three months.” When they finished the
first bottle of champagne, Mr. Rasmussen ordered an-
other. By the time the cafe closed Eveline's ears were ring-
ing. "Let's make a night of it,” Mr. Rasmussen was saying.
    They went in a taxicab up to Montmartre to L'Abbaye
where there was dancing and singing and uniforms every-
where and everything was hung with the flags of the Allies.
J.W. asked Eveline to dance with him first and Eleanor
looked a little sour when she had to go off in the arms of
 Mr. Rasmussen who danced very badly indeed. Eveline
and J.W. talked about the music of Rameau and J.W.
 said again that he would have liked to have lived in the
 times of the court at Versailles. But Eveline said what
 could be more exciting than to be in Paris right now with

 all the map of Europe being remade right under their

 noses, and J.W. said perhaps she was right. They agreed
 that the orchestra was too bad to dance to.
     Next dance Eveline danced with Mr. Rasmussen who
 told her how handsome she was and said he needed a good

                                                                               303

741
                                that he’d spent all his life out in the
woman in his life 3
bush grubbing around for gold or testing specimens of shale
and that he was sick of it, and if Wilson now was going

to let the British bulldoze him into giving them the world’s
future supply of oil when we’d won the war for them,
he was through. ^^But can’t you do something about it,

can’t you put your ideas before the public, Mr. Ras-
                                                                                     Eve-
mussen?” said Eveline, leaning a little against him 3
line had a crazy champagneglass spinning in her head.
    “That’s Moorehouse’s job not mine, and there isn’t anj
public since the war. The public’ll damn well do what it’s

told, and besides like God Almighty it’s far away .           . .
what we’ve got to do is make a few key men understand
the situation. Moorehouse is the key to the key men.”
“And who’s the key to Moorehouse?” asked Eveline reck-

lessly. The music had stopped. “Wish to heaven I knew,”
said Rasmussen soberly in a low voice. “You’re not, are
you?” Eveline shook her head with a tightlipped smile
like Eleanor’s.
    When they’d eaten onion soup and some cold meat
J.W. said, “Let’s go up to the top of the hill and make
Freddy play us some songs.” “I thought you didn’t like

it up there,” said Eleanor. “I don’t, my dear,” said J.W.,
“but I like those old French songs.” Eleanor looked cross
and sleepy. Eveline wished she and Mr. Rasmussen would
                  she felt if she could only talk to J.W. alone,
go home 3
he’d be so interesting.

                                                  it was chilly in there. They
    Freddy’s was almost empty 3
didn’t have any champagne and nobody drank the liqueurs
they ordered. Mr. Rasmussen said Freddy looked like an
old prospector he’d known out in the Sangre de Cristo
mountains and began to tell a long story about Death
Valley that nobody listened to. They were all chilly and
sleepy and silent, going back across Paris in the old
mouldysmelling twocylinder tasd. J.W. wanted a cup of

        304

742
coffee, but there didn’t seem to be anywhere open where
he could get it.
   Next day Mr. Rasmussen called Eveline up at her
office to ask her to eat lunch with him and she was hard
put to it to find an excuse not to go. After that Mr. Ras-
mussen seemed to be everywhere she went, sending her
flowers and theatre tickets, coming around with automobiles
to take her nding, sending her little blue pneumatiques
full of tender messages. Eleanor teased her about her new
Romeo.
    Then Paul Johnson turned up in Paris, having gotten
himself into the Sorbonne detachment, and used to come
around to her place on the rue de Bussy in the late after-
noons and sit watching her silently and lugubriously. He
and Mr. Rasmussen would sit there talking about wheat
and the stockyards, while Eveline dressed to go out with
somebody else, usually Eleanor and J.W. Eveline could
see that J.W. always liked to have her along as well as

                                                                           it was just
Eleanor when they went out in the evenings 5
that welldressed American girls were rare in Paris at that
time, she told herself, and that J.W. liked to be seen with
them and to have them along when he took important
people out to dinner. She and Eleanor treated each other
with a stiff nervous sarcasm now, except occasionally when
they were alone together, they talked like in the old days,
laughing at people and happenings together. Eleanor
wocid never let a chance pass to poke fun at her Romeos.
    Her brother George turned up at the oflice one day
with a captain’s two silver bars on his shoulders. His whip-
cord uniform fitted like a glove, his puttees shone and he
wore spurs. He’d been in the intelligence service attached
to the British and had just come down from Germany
where he’d been an interpreter on General McAndrews’

staff. He was going to Cambridge for the spring term and
called everybody Wighters or rotters and said the food at

the restaurant where Eveline took him for lunch was

                                                                              305

743
simply ripping. After he^d left her, saying her ideas were
not cricket, she burst out crying. When she was leaving
tht office that afternoon, thinking gloomily about how
George had grown up to be a horrid little prig of a brass-
hat, she met Mr. Rasmussen under the arcades of the
rue de Rivolij he was carrying a mechanical canarybird.
It was a stuffed canary and you wound it up underneath
the cage. Then it fluttered its wings and sang. He made
her stop on the corner while he made it sing.             going
to send that back home to the kids ” he said. ^^My wife
                                                                          they live in
and I are separated but I’m fond of the kids ;
Pasadena . .  . Pve had a very unhappy life.” Then he
invited Eveline to step into the Ritz bar and have a cock-

tail with him. Robbins was there with a redheaded news-
paper woman from San Francisco. They sat at a wicker
table together and drank Alexanders. The bar was
crowded. ^What’s the use of a league of nations if it’s to
be dominated by Great Britain and her colonies?” said Mr,
Rasmussen sourly. ^^But don’t you think any land of a
league’s better than nothing said Eveline. ^Tt’s not the
name you give things, it’s who’s getting theirs underneath
that counts,” said Robbins.
    ^^That’s a very cynical remark,” said the California
woman. “This isn’t any time to be cynical.”
    “This is a time,” said Robbins, “when if we weren’t
cynical we’d shoot ourselves.”




    In March Eveline’s two week leave came around.
Eleanor was going to make a trip to Rome to help wind
up the affairs of the office there, so they decided they’d go
down on the train together and spend a few days in Nice.
They needed to get the damp cold of Paris out of their
 hones. Eveline felt as excited as a child the afternoon when
 they were all packed and ready to go and had bought

         306

744
wagon lit reservations and gotten their transport orders
signed.
   Mr. Rasmussen insisted on seeing her off and ordered
up a big dinner in the restaurant at the Gare de Lyon that
Eveline was too excited to eat, what with the smell of
the coalsmoke and the thought of waking up where it
would be sunny and warm. Paul Johnson appeared when
they were about half through, saying he’d come to help
them with their bags. He’d lost one of the buttons off his
uniform and he looked gloomy and mussed up. He said
he wouldn’t eat anything but nervously drank down sev-
eral glasses of wine. Both he and Mr. Rasmussen looked
like thunderclouds when Jerry Burnham appeared drunk
as a lord carrying a large bouquet of roses. “Won’t that
be taking coals to Newcastle, Jerry?” said Eveline. “You
                                     you’ll probably have skating down
don’t know Nice .    . .
there .  . . beautiful figure eights on the ice.” “Jerry,”
said Eleanor in her chilly little voice, “you’re thinking of
St Moritz.” “You’ll be thinking of it too,” said Jerry,
“when you feel that cold wind.”
    Meanwhile Paul and Mr. Rasmussen had picked up
their bags. “Honestly, we’d better make tracks,” said
Paul, nervously jiggling Eveline’s suitcase. “It’s about
traintime.” They all scampered through the station. Jerry
Burnham had forgotten to buy a ticket and couldn’t go
out on the platform, they left him arguing with the officials
and searching his pockets for his presscard. Paul put the
bags in the compartment and shook hands hurriedly with
Eleanor. Eveline found his eyes in hers serious and hurt

like a dog’s eyes.
    “You won’t stay too long, will you? There’s not much
time left,” he said. Eveline felt she’d like to kiss him,
but the train was starting. Paul scrambled off. AU Mr.
Rasmussen could do was hand some papers and Jerry’s
roses through the window and wave his hat mournfully
from the platform. It was a relief the train had started.

                                                                              307

745
Eleanor was leaning back against the cushions laughing
and laughing.
          declare, Eveline. You’re too funny with your
Romeos.” Eveline couldn’t help laughing herself. She
leaned over and patted Eleanor on the shoulder. ‘^‘^Let’s

just have a wonderful time,” she said.
    Next morning early when Eveline woke up and looked
out they were in the station at Marseilles. It gave her a
funny feeling because she’d wanted to stop off there and
see the town, but Eleanor had insisted on going straight
to Nice, she hated the sordidness of seaports she’d said.
But later when they had their coffee in the diner, looking
out at the pines and the dry hills and headlands cutting out
blue patches of the Mediterranean, Eveline felt excited and
happy again.
    They got a good room in a hotel and walked through
the streets in the cool sunshine among the wounded sol-
diers and officers of all the allied armies and strolled along
the Promenade des Anglais under the grey palmtrees and
gradually Eveline began to feel a chilly feeling of dis-
appointment coming over her. Here was her two weeks
leave and she was going to waste it at Nice. Eleanor kept
on being crisp and cheerful and suggested they sit down
in the big cafe on the square where a brass band was play-
ing and have a little dubonnet before lunch. After they’d
sat there for some time, looking at the uniforms and the
quantities of overdressed women who were no better than
they should be, Eveline leaned back in her chair and said,
^^And now that we’re here, darling, what on earth shall
we do?”
    The next morning Eveline woke late; she almost hated
to get up as she couldn’t imagine how she was going to
pass the time all day. As she lay there looking at the stripes
of simlight on the wall that came through the shutters,
she heard a man’s voice in the adjoining room, that was
Eleanor’s. Eveline stiffened and listened. It was J.W.’s
         308

746
voice. When she got up and dressed she found her heart
was pounding. She was pulling on her best pair of trans--
parent black silk stockings when Eleanor came in, “Who
do you think’s turned up? J.W. just motored down to see
me off to Italy . . . He said it was getting too stuffy for
him around the Peace Conference and he had to get a
change of air  .  .  . Come on in, Eveline, dear, and have
some coffee with us.”
   She can’t keep the triumph out of her voice, aren’t
women silly, thought Eveline. “That’s lovely, I’ll be
right in, darling,” she said in her most musical tones.
   J.W. had on a light grey flannel suit and a bright blue
necktie and his face was pink from the long ride. He was
in fine spirits. He’d driven down from Paris in fifteen
hours with only four hours sleep after dinner in Lyons.
They all drank a great deal of bitter coffee with hot milk
and planned out a ride.
    It was a fine day. The big Packard car rolled them
smoothly along the Corniche. They Ixmched at Monte
Carlo, took a look at the casino in the afternoon and went
on and had tea In an English tearoom in Mentone. Next
day they went up to Grasse and saw the perfume factories,
and the day after they put Eleanor on the rapide for
Rome. J.W. was to leave immediately afterwards to go
back to Pans. Eleanor’s thin white face looked a little
forlorn Eveline thought, looking out at them through the
window of the wagonlit. When the train pulled out Eveline
and J.W. stood on the platform in the empty station with
the smoke swirling milky with sunlight under the glass
roof overhead and looked at each other with a certain
amount of constraint. “She’s a great little girl,” said J.W.
“I’m very fond of her,” said Eveline. Her voice rang

false in her ears. “I wish we were going with her.”
    They walked back out to the car. “Where can I take
you, Eveline, before I pull out, back to the hotel?” Eve-

line’s heart was pounding again. “Suppose we have a little

                                                                             309

747
lunch before you go, let me invite you to lunch.”
very nice of you .     .  . well, I suppose I might as well,
IVe got to lunch somewhere. And there’s no place fit for
a white man between here and Lyons.”
   They lunched at the casino over the water. The sea
was very blue. Outside there were three sailboats with
lateen sails making for the entrance to the port. It was
warm and jolly, smelt of wine and food sizzled in butter
in the glassedin restaurant. Eveline began to like it in
Nice.
   J.W. drank more wine than he usually did. He began
to talk about his boyhood in Wilmington and even
hummed a little of a song he’d written in the old days.
Eveline was thrilled. Then he began to tell her about
Pittsburgh and his ideas about capital and labor. For des-
sert they had peaches flambe with rum, Eveline recklessly
ordered a bottle of champagne. They were getting along
famously.
    They began to talk about Eleanor. Eveline told about
how she’d met Eleanor in the Art Institute and how
Eleanor had meant everything to her in Chicago, the only
girl she’d ever met who was really interested in the things
she was interested in, and how much talent Eleanor had,
and how much business abihty. J.W. told about how much
she’d meant to him during the trying years with his second
wife Gertrude in New York, and how people had mis-
understood their beautiful friendship that had been always
free from the sensual and the degrading.
    ^^Really,” said Eveline, looking J.W. suddenly straight
in the eye, ^T’d always thought you and Eleanor were
lovers.” J.W. blushed. For a second Eveline was afraid
she’d shocked him. He wrinkled up the skin around his
eyes in a comical boyish way. “No, honestly not . . . I’ve
been too busy working all my life ever to develop that
side of my nature . . . People think differently about
  hose things than they did.” Eveline nodded. The deep
         310

748
flush on his face seemed to have set her cheeks on fire*
^^And now,” J.W. went on, shaking his head gloomily,
        in my forties and iPs too late ”
   ^Why too latei^”
   Eveline sat looking at him with her lips a little apart,
her cheeks blazing. “Maybe it’s taken the war to teach
us how to live,” he said. “We’ve been too much interested
in money and material things, it’s taken the French to show
us how to live. Where back home in the States could you
find a beautiful atmosphere like this?” J.W. waved his
arm to include in a sweeping gesture the sea, the tables
crowded with women dressed in bright colors and men in
their best uniforms, the bright glint of blue light on glasses
and cutlery. The waiter mistook his gesture and slyly sub-
stituted a full bottle for the empty bottle in the cham-
pagnepail.
    “By golly, Eveline, you’ve been so charming, you’ve
made me forget the time and going back to Pans and
everything. This is the sort of thing I’ve missed all my
life until I met you and Eleanor ... of course with
Eleanor it’s been all on the higher plane    . .   . Let’s take
a drink to Eleanor . . , beautiful talented Eleanor . .           .
Eveline, women have been a great inspiration to me all
my life, lovely charming delicate women. Many of my
best ideas have come from women, not directly, you
understand, but through the mental stimulation . .             .
People don’t understand me, Eveline, some of the news-
paper boys particularly have written some very hard things
about me . . . why, I’m an old newspaper man myself

, . . Eveline, permit me to say that you look so charming
and understanding .   . . this illness of my wife .     .  . poor
Gertrude . . . I’m afraid she’ll never be herself again.
... You see, it’s put me in a most disagreeable position,

if some member of her family is appointed guardian it
might mean that the considerable sum of money invested
by the Staple family in my business, would be withdrawn

749
, . . that would leave me with very grave embarrass-
ments . . . then Pve had to abandon my Mexican affairs

. . . what the oil business down there needs is just some-
body to explain its point of view to the Mexican public,
to the American public, my aim was to get the big interests
to take the public in . .           Eveline filled his glass. Her
head was swimming a little, but she felt wonderful. She
wanted to lean over and kiss him, to make him feel how
she admired and understood him. He went on talking
with the glass in his hand, almost as if he were Speaking
to a whole rotary club.         . . to take the public into its
confidence ... I had to throw overboard all that . . .
when I felt the government of my country needed me.
My position is very difficult in Paris, Eveline. . . .
TheyVe got the President surrounded by a Chinese wall
... I fear that his advisers don’t realize the importance
of publicity, of taking the public into their confidence at
every move. This is a great histoncal moment, America
stands at the parting of the ways . . . without us the war
would have ended in a German victory or a negotiated
peace . .  . And now our very allies are trying to mon-
opolize the natural resources of the world behind our backs.

. . . You remember what Rasmussen said . .     . well, he’s
quite right. The President is surrounded by sinister in-
trigues. Why, even the presidents of the great corporations
don’t realize that now is the time to spend money, to
spend it like water. I could have the French press in my
pocket in a week with the proper resources, even in Eng-
land I have a hunch that something could be done if it
was handled the right way. And then the people are
fully behind us everywhere, they are sick of autocracy and
secret diplomacy, they are ready to greet American democ-
racy, American democratic business methods with open
arms. The only way for us to secure the benefits of the
peace to the world is for us to dominate it. Mr. Wilson
doesn’t realize the power of a modem campaign of scien-

        Sra

750
tific publicity . .     . Why, for three weeks Pve been trying
to get an interview with him, and back in Washington I
was calling him Woodrow, almost . . * It was at his per-
sonal request that I dropped everything in New York
at great personal sacrifice, brought over a large part o£ my
office staff . . . and now . . . but Eveline, my dear girl,
Pm afraid I’m talking you to death.”
    Eveline leaned over and patted his hand that lay on
the edge of the table. Her eyes were shining, “Oh, it’s
wonderful,” she said. “Isn’t this fun, J.W.?”
    “Ah, Eveline, I wish I was free to fall in love with
you.”
    “Aren’t we pretty free, J.W.? and it’s wartime              . .

I think all the conventional rubbish about marriage and
everything is just too tiresome, don’t you?”
    “Ah, Eveline, if I was only free .        . . let’s go out and
take a little air .    .  . Why, we’ve been here all afternoon.”
    Eveline insisted on paying for the lunch although it took
all the money she had on her. They both staggered a little
as they left the restaurant, Evebne felt giddy and leaned
against J.W.’s shoulder. He kept patting her hand and
saying, “There, there, we’ll take a little ride,”
    Towards sunset they were riding around the end of the
bay into Cannes. “Well, well, we must pull ourselves to-
gether,” said J.W. “You don’t want to stay down here
all alone, do you, little girl? Suppose you drive back to
Paris with me, we’ll stop off in some picturesque villages,
make a trip of it. Too likely to meet people we know
around here. I’ll send back the staff car and hire a French
car . .    . take no chances.” “All right, I think Nice is just
too tiresome anyway.”
    J.W. called to the chauffeur to go back to Nice. He
 dropped her at her hotel and saying he’d call for her at
 ninethirty in the morning and that she must get a good
night’s sleep. She felt terribly let down after he’d gonej
 h^ a cup of tea that was cold and tasted of soap sent to

                                                                              313

751
her room, and went to bed. She lay in bed thinking that
                                                               but it was too late
she was acting like a nasty little bitch j
to go back now. She couldn’t sleep, her whole body felt
jangled and twitching. This way she’d look like a wreck
tomorrow, she got up and rustled around in her bag until
she found some aspirin. She took a lot of the aspinn and
got back in bed again and lay perfectly still but she kept
seeing faces that would grow clear out of the blur of a half-
dream and then fade again, and her ears buzzed with long
cadences of senseless talk. Sometimes it was Jerry Bum-
ham’s face that would bud out of the mists changing slowly
into Mr. Rasmussen’s or Edgar Robbins’ or Paul Johnson’s
or Freddy Seargeant’s. She got up and walked shivering
up and down the room for a long time. Then she got into
bed again and fell asleep and didn’t wake up until the
chambermaid knocked on the door saying that a gentleman
was waiting for her.
   When she got down J.W. was pacing up and down in
the sun outside the hotel door. A long lowslung Italian
car was standing under the palms beside the geranium bed.
They had coffee together without saying much at a little
iron table outside the hotel. J.W. said he’d had a miserable
room in a hotel where the service was poor.
    As soon as Eveline got her bag down they started off
at sixty miles an hour. The chauffeur drove like a fiend
through a howling north wind that increased as they went
down the coast. They were in Marseilles stiff and dust-
caked in time for a late lunch at a fish restaurant on the
edge of the old harbor. Eveline’s head was whirling again,
with speed and lashing wind and dust and vines and olive-
trees and grey rock mountains whirling past and now and
then a piece of slateblue sea cut out with a jigsaw.
    ^^After all, J.W., the war was terrible,” said Eveline.
^^But it’s a great time to be alive. Things are happening at
last.” J.W. muttered something about a surge of idealism
between his teeth and went on eating his bouillabaisse. He
         3H

752
didn’t seem to be very talkative today. ^^Now at home/’ he
saidj ^^they wouldn’t have left all the bones in the fish this
way.” “Well, what do you think is going to happen about
the oil situation?” Eveline started again. “Blamed if I
know,” said J.W. “We’d better be starting if we’re going
to make that place before nightfall.”
   J.W. had sent the chauffeur to buy an extra rug and
they wrapped themselves up tight under the little hood
in the back of the car. J.W. put his arm around Eveline
and tucked her in. “Now we’re snug as a bug in a rug,”
he said. They giggled cosily together.
    The mistral got so strong the poplars were all bent
double on the dusty plains before the car started to climb
the winding road to Les Baux. Bucking the wind cut down
their speed. It was dark when they got into the ruined
town.
    They were the only people in the hotel. It was cold
there and the knots of olivewood burning in the grates
didn’t give any heat, only puffs of grey smoke when a gust
of wind came down the chimney, but they had an excellent
dinner and hot spiced wine that made them feel much
better. They had to put on their overcoats to go up to
their bedroom. Climbing the stairs J.W. kissed her under
the ear and whispered, “Eveline, dear little girl, you make
 me feel like a boy again.”
    Long after J.W. had gone to sleep Eveline lay awake
 beside him listening to the wind rattling the shutters, yelL
 ing around the corners of the roof, howling over the desert

 plain far below. The house smelt of dry dusty coldness. No
 matter how much she cuddled against him, she couldn’t get

 to feel really warm. The same creaky carrousel of faces,

 plans, scraps of talk kept going round and round in her
 head, keeping her from thinking consecutively, keeping her
 from going to sleep.
     Next morning when J.W, found he had to bathe out of

                                                                               315

753
a basin he made a face and said, “I hope you don^t mind
roughing it this way, dear little girL”
   They went over across the Rhone to Nimes for lunch
riding through Arles and Avignon on the way, then they
turned back to the Rhone and got into Lyons late at night.
They had supper sent up to their room in the hotel and
took hot baths and drank hot wine again. When the waiter
had taken away the tray Eveline threw herself on J.W.’s
lap and began to kiss him. It was a long time before she’d

let him go to sleep.
    Next morning it was raining hard. They waited around
a couple of hours hoping it would stop. J.W. was preoccu-
pied and tried to get Paris on the phone, but without any
luck, Eveline sat in the dreary hotel salon reading old
copies of VlllustraUon. She wished she was back in Paris
too. Finally they decided to start.
    The rain went down to a drizzle but the roads were
in bad shape and by dark they hadn’t gotten any further
than Nevers. J.W. was getting the sniffles and started
taking quinine to ward off a cold. He got adjoining rooms
with a bath between in the hotel at Nevers, so that night
they slept in separate beds. At supper Eveline tried to get
him talking about the peace conference, but he said, “Why
talk shop, we’ll be back there soon enough, why not talk
about ourselves and each other.”
    When they got near Paris, J.W. began to get nervous.
His nose had begun to run. At Fontainebleau they had a
fine lunch. J.W. went in from there on the train, leaving
the chauffeur to take Eveline home to the rue de Bussy
and then deliver his baggage at the Crillon afterward.
Eveline felt pretty forlorn riding in all alone through the
suburbs of Paris. She was remembering how excited she’d
been when they’d all been seeing her off at the Gare de
Lyons a few days before and decided she was very un-
 happy indeed.
     Next day she went aroimd to the Crillon at about the
         316

754
usual time in the afternoon. There was nobody in J.W.’s
anteroom but Miss Williams, his secretary. She stared
Eveline right in the face with such cold hostile eyes that
Eveline immediately thought she must know something.
She said Mr. Moorehouse had a bad cold and fever and
wasn’t seeing anybody.
    ^Well, I’ll write him a little note,” said Eveline. “No,
I’ll call him up later. Don’t you think that’s the idea,
Miss Williams?” Miss Williams nodded her head dryly.
“Very well,” she said.
    Eveline lingered. “You see, I’ve just come back from
leave ... I came back a couple of days early because
there was so much sightseeing 1 wanted to do near Paris.
Isn’t the weather miserable?”
    Miss Williams puckered her forehead thoughtfully
and took a step towards her. “Very . . . It’s most unfor-
tunate, Miss Hutchins, that Mr. Moorehouse should have
gotten this cold at this moment. We have a number of
important matters pending. And the way things are at the
Peace Conference the situation changes every minute so
that constant watchfulness is necessary ... We think

it is a very important moment from every point of
view ... Too bad Mr. Moorehouse should get laid up
just now. We feel very badly about it, all of us. He feels
just terribly about it.”
    “I’m so sorry,” said Eveline, “I do hope he’ll be better
 tomorrow.”
    “The doctor says he will . . . but it’s very unfortu-
 nate.”
    Eveline stood hesitating. She didn’t know what to say.
 Then she caught sight of a little gold star that Miss Wil-
 liams wore on a brooch. Eveline wanted to make friends.
 “Oh, Miss Williams,” she said, “I didn’t know you lost
 anyone dear to you,” Miss Williams’s face got more chilly
 and pinched than ever. She seemed to be fumbling for
 something to say. “Er . . . my brother was in the navy,’^
                                                                              3W

755
she said and walked over to her desk where she started
typing very fast. Eveline stood where she was a second
watching Miss Williams’s fingers twinkling on the key-
board. Then she said weakly, ^^Oh, I’m so sorry,” and
turned and went out.
   When Eleanor got back, with a lot of old Italian
damask in her trunk, J.W. was up and around again. It
seemed to Eveline that Eleanor had something cold and
sarcastic in her manner of speaking she’d never had be-
fore. When she went to the Crillon to tea Miss Williams
would hardly speak to Eveline, but put herself out to be
polite to Eleanor. Even Morton, the valet, seemed to
make the same difference. J.W. from time to time gave
her a furtive squeeze of the hand, but they never got to
go out alone any more. Eveline began to think of going
home to America, but the thought of going back to Santa
Fe or to any kind of life she’d lived before was hideous
to her. She wrote J.W. long uneasy notes every day tell-
ing him how unhappy she was, but he never mentioned
them when she saw him. When she asked him once why
he didn’t ever wnte her a few words he said quickly,
never write personal letters,” and changed the subject.




     In the end of April Don Stevens turned up in Paris.
 He was in civilian clothes as he’d resigned from the re-
 construction unit. He asked Eveline to put him up as
 he was broke. Eveline was afraid of the concierge and
 of what Eleanor or J.W. might say if they found out,
 but she felt desperate and bitter and didn’t care much
 what happened anyway; so she said all right, she’d put
 him up but he wasn’t to tell anybody where he was stay-
 ing. Don teased her about her bourgeois ideas, said those
 sorts of things wouldn’t matter after the revolution, that
 the first test of strength was coming on the first of May.

          318

756
                                                                                            '




He made her read UHumamte and took her up to the rue
du Croissant to show her the little restaurant where
Jaures had been assassinated.
    One day a tall longfaced young man in some kind of a
uniform came into the office and turned out to be Freddy
Seargeant, who had just got a job in the Near East Re-
lief and was all excited about going out to Constantinople.
Eveline was dehghted to see him, but after she’d been
with him all afternoon she began to feel that the old talk
about the theater and decoration and pattern and coloi
and form didn’t mean much to her any more. Freddy was
in ecstasy about bemg in Paris, and the little children
sailing boats in the ponds in the Tuileries gardens, and
the helmets of the Garde Republicaine turned out to
salute the King and Queen of the Belgians who happened
to be going up the rue de Rivoli when they passed,
Eveline felt mean and teased him about not having gone
through with it as a C.O.j he explained that a friend had
gotten him into the camouflage service before he knew it
and that he didn’t care about politics anyway, and that
before he could do anything the war was over and he was
discharged. They tried to get Eleanor to go out to din-
ner with them, but she had a mysterious engagement to
dine with J.W. and some people from the quai d’Orsay,
and couldn’t come. Eveline went with Freddy to the
Opera Comique to see PSlleas but she felt fidgety all
through it and almost slapped him when she saw he was
crying at the end. Having an orange water ice at the Cafe
Neapolitain afterwards, she upset Freddy terribly by say-
ing Debussy was old hat, and he took her home glumly in
a taxi. At the last minute she relented and tried to be
 nice to him5 she promised to go out to Chartres with
 him the next Sunday.
     It was still dark when Freddy turned up Sunday morn-
 ing. They went out and got some coffee sleepily from
 an old woman who had a little stand in the doorway op

                                                                              319

757
posite. They still had an hour before train time and
Freddy suggested they go and get Eleanor up, He^d so
looked forward to going to Chartres with both of them,
he saidj it would be old times all over again, he hated
to think how life was drawing them all apart. So they
got into a cab and went down to the quai de la Tournelle.
The great question was how to get in the house as the
street door was locked and there was no concierge. Freddy
rang and rang the bell until finally the Frenchman who
lived on the lower floor came out indignant in his bath-
robe and let them in.
    They banged on EleanoFs door. Freddy kept shouting,
^^Eleanor Stoddard, you jump right up and come to Char-
tres with us.^^ After a while Eleanor’s face appeared, cool
and white and collected, in the crack of the door above a
stunning blue negligee.
    “Eleanor, we’ve got just a half an hour to catch the
train for Chartres, the taxi has full steam up outside and
if you don’t come we’ll all regret it to our dying day.”
    “But I’m not dressed . ,      . it’s so early.”
    “You look charming enough to go just as you are.”
Freddy pushed through the door and grabbed her in his
arms. “Eleanor, you’ve got to come .     .  . I’m off for the
Near East tomorrow night.”
    Eveline followed them into the salon. Passing the
half open door of the bedroom, she glanced in and found
herself looking J.W. full in the face. He was sitting bolt
upright in the bed, wearing pyjamas with a bright blue
stripe. His blue eyes looked straight through her. Some
impulse made Eveline pull the door to. Eleanor noticed
her gesture. “Thank you, darling,” she said coolly, “it’s
so untidy in there,”
    “Oh, do come, Eleanor . . . after all you can’t have
forgotten old times the way hardhearted Hannah there
seems to have,” said Freddy in a cajoling whine.
    “Let me think,” said Eleanor, tapping her chin with
         320

758
the sharp pointed nail of a white forefinger, “Pll tell you
what wedl do, darlings, you two go out on the poky old
train as you’re ready and Pll run out as soon as I’m
dressed and call up J.W. at the Crillon and see if he
won’t drive me out. Then we can all come back together*
How’s that?”
    ^^That would be lovely, Eleanor dear,” said Eveline in
a singsong voice, “Splendid, oh, I knew you’d come .    . ,
well, we’ve got to be off. If we miss each other we’ll be
in front of the cathedral at noon ... Is that all right
    Eveline went downstairs in a daze. All the way out to
Chartres Freddy was accusing her bitterly of being ab-
sentminded and not libng her old friends any more.
    By the time they got to Chartres it was raining hard.
They spent a gloomy day there. The stained glass that
had been taken away for safety during the war hadn’t been
put back yet. The tall twelfthcentury saints had a wet,
slimy look in the driving rain. Freddy said that the sight
of the black virgin surrounded by candles in the crypt
was worth all the trouble of the trip for him, but it wasn’t
 for Eveline. Eleanor and J.W. didn’t turn up, “Of course
 not in this rain,” said Freddy. It was a kind of relief to
 Eveline to find that she’d caught cold and would have to
 go to bed as soon as she got home. Freddy took her to
 her door in a taxi but she wouldn’t let him come up for
 fear he’d find Don there.
     Don was there, and was very sympathetic about her
 cold and tucked her In bed and made her a hot lemonade
 with cognac in it. He had his pockets full of money, as
 he’d just sold some articles, and had gotten a job to go to
 Vienna for the Ddly Herald of London. He was pulling
 out as soon after May i as he could . .        . “unless some-
 thing breaks here,” he said Impressively. He went away
 that evening to a hotel, thanking her for putting him up
 like a good comrade even if she ^dn’t love him any more.
 The place felt empty after h^d gone. She almost wished

                                                                               321

759
          made him stay. She lay in bed feeling feverishly
miserable^ and finally went to sleep feeling sick and scared
and lonely.




    The morning of the first of May, Paul Johnson came
around before she was up. He was in civilian clothes and
looked young and slender and nice and lighthaired and
handsome. He said Don Stevens had gotten him all
wrought up about what was going to happen what with
the general strike and all that, he’d come to stick around

if Eveline didn’t mind. “I thought I’d better not be in
uniform, so I borrowed this suit from a feller,” he said.
     think ni strike too,” said Eveline.               so sick of that
Red Cross office I could scream.”
    “Gee, that ud be wonderful, Eveline. We can walk
around and see the excitement.   .  .  . It’ll be all right if
you’re with me ... I mean I’ll be easier in my mind if

I know where you are if there’s trouble .              . . You’re
awful reckless, Eveline.”
    “My, you look handsome in that suit, Paul ... I
never saw you in civilian clothes before.”
    Paul blushed and put his hands uneasily into his pock-

 ets, “Lord, I’ll be glad to get into civvies for keeps,” he
 said seriously. “Even though it’ll mean me goin’ back to
 work ... I can’t get a darn thing out of these Sorbonne
 lectures .  .  . everybody’s too darn restless, I guess .     .  .
 and I’m sick of hearing what bums the boche are, that’s all
 the frog profs seem to be able to talk about.”
     “Well, go out and read a book and I’ll get up. . . .
 Did you notice if the old woman across the way had coffee
 out?”
     “Yare, she did,” called Paul from the salon to which
 he’d retreated when Eveline stuck her toes out from

          322

760
under the bedclothes ^^Shall I go out and bring some
in?’’
   “That’s a darling, do.     .  . . I’ve got brioches and but-
ter here   .  .  . take that enamelled milkcan out of the
kitchen.”
   Eveline looked at herself in the mirror before she
started dressing. She had shadows under her eyes and
faint beginnings of crowsfeet. Chillier than the damp Pans
room came the thought of growing old. It was so horribly
actual that she suddenly burst into tears. An old hag’i?
tearsmeared face looked at her bitterly out of the mirror.
She pressed the palms of her hands hard over her eyes
“Oh, I lead such a silly life,” she whispered aloud.
    Paul was back. She could hear him moving around
awkwardly in the salon. “I forgot to tell you . . . Don
says Anatole France is going to march with the mutilays
of la guerre. . .       . I’ve got the cafay o lay whenevei
you’re ready.”
    “Just a minute,” she called from the basin where sh^
was splashing cold water on her face. “How old are you,
Paul?” she asked him when she came out of her bedroom
all dressed, smiling, feeling that she was looking her best.
    “Free, white and twenty one . .         . we’d better drink
up this coffee before it gets cold.” “You don’t look as old
as that.” “Oh, I’m old enough to know better,” said Paul,
getting very red in the face. “I’m five years older than
that,” said Eveline. “Oh, how I hate growing old,” “Five
years don’t mean anything,” stammered Paul.
    He was so nervous he spilt a lot of coffee over his
trouserleg. “Oh, hell, that’s a dumb thing to do,” he
growled. “I’ll get it out in a second,” said Eveline, run-
ning for a towel.
    She made him sit in a chair and kneeled down in front
 of him and scrubbed at the inside of his thigh with the
 towel. Paul sat there stiff, red as a beet, with his lips
 pressed together. He jumped to his feet before she’d fin-

                                                                               323

761
                                                                                            ^




ished.              let^s go out and see what’s happening. I
wish I knew more about what it’s all about.”
    “Well, you might at least say thank you,” said Eveline,

looking up at him.
    “Thanks, gosh, it’s awful nice of you, Eveline.”
    Outside It was like Sunday. A few stores were open
on the side streets but they had their iron shutters half-
way down. It was a grey day^ they walked up the Boule-
vard St. Germain, passing many people out strolling in
their best clothes. It wasn’t until a squadron of the Guarde
Republicaine clattered past them in their shiny helmets
and their tricolor plumes that they had any inkling of
tenseness in the air.
    Over on the other side of the Seine there were more
people and little groups of gendarmes standing around.
   At the crossing of several streets they saw a cluster
of old men in workclothes with a red flag and a
sign, L’UNION DES TRAVAILLEURS FERA LA
PAIX DU MONDE. A cordon of republican guards
rode down on them with their sabres drawn, the sun flash-
ing on their helmets. The old men ran or flattened them-
selves in doorways.
    On the Grands Boulevards there were companies of
poilus in tin hats and grimy blue uniforms standing round
their stacked rifles. The crowds on the streets cheered
them as they surged past, everything seemed goodna-
tured and jolly. Eveline and Paul began to get tired
they’d been walking all morning. They began to wonder
where they’d get any lunch. Then too it was starting to
rain.
    Passing the Bourse they met Don Stevens, who had
just come out of the telegraph ofEce. He was sore and
tired. He’d been up since five o’clock. “If they’re going
to have a riot why the hell can’t they have it in time to
make the cables . . . Well, I saw Anatole France dis-
persed on the Place d’Alma. Ought to be a story in that

762
except for all this damned censorship. Things are pretty
serious in Germany ... I think something’s going to
happen there.”
   ^^Will anything happen here in Paris, Don?” asked
Paul.
   ^^Damned if I know . .       . some kids busted up those
gratings around the trees and threw them at the cops on
the avenue Magenta. . . . Burnham in there says there
are barncades at the end of the place de la Bastille, but
Pm damned if Pm going over till I get something to
eat ... I don’t believe it anyway .          .  . Pm about foun-
dered. What are you two bourgeois doing out a day like
this?”
   ^^Hey, fellowworker, don’t shoot,” said Paul, throwing
up his hands. “Wait till we get something to eat,” Eveline
laughed. She thought how much better she liked Paul
than she liked Don.
   They walked around a lot of back streets in the driz-
zling rain and at last found a little restaurant from which
came voices and a smell of food. They ducked in under
the iron shutter of the door. It was dark and crowded
with taxidrivers and workingmen. They squeezed into the
end of a marble table where two old men were playing
chess. Eveline’s leg was pressed against Paul’s. She didn’t
            then he began to get red and moved his chair a
move 5
little, “Excuse me,” he said.
    They all ate liver and onions and Don got to talking
with the old men in his fluent bad French. They said the
youngsters weren’t good for anything nowadays, in the
old days when they descended into the street they tore up
the pavings and grabbed the cops by the legs and pulled
them off their horses. Today was supposed to be a gen-
eral strike and what had they done? . . . nothing .          . .

a few urchins had thrown some stones and one cafe win-
dow had been broken. It wasn’t like that that liberty de-
fended itself and the dignity of labor. The old men weni

                                                                             325

763
back to their chess. Don set them up to a bottle of wine.
   Eveline was sitting back halflistening, wondering if
she’d go around to see J.W. in the afternoon. She hadn’t
                                                                                        she
seen him or Eleanor since that Sunday morning j
didn’t care anyway. She wondered if Paul would many
her, how it would be to have a lot of little babies that
would have the same young coltish fuzzy look he had.
She liked it in this little dark restaurant that smelt of
food and wine and caporal ordinaire, sitting back and let-
ling Don lay down the law to Paul about the revolu-
tion. ^^When 1 get back home I guess Pll bum around
the country a little, get a job as a harvest hand and stuff
like that and find out about those things,” Paul said
finally. ^^Now I don’t know a darn thing, just what I hear
people say.”
    After they had eaten they were sitting over some glasses
of wine, when they heard an American voice. Two M.P.’s
had come in and were having a drink at the zinc bar.
“Don’t talk English,” whispered Paul. They sat there
stiffly trying to look as French as possible until the two
khaki uniforms disappeared, then Paul said, “Whee, I was
scared . . . they’d picked me up sure as hell if they’d
found me without my uniform. .      .  . Then it’d have been
the Roo Saint Anne and goodby Paree.” ^Why, you poor
kid, they’d have shot you at sunrise,” said Eveline. “You
go right home and change your clothes at once . . . Pm
going to the Red Cross for a while anyway,”
    Don walked over to the rue de Rivoli with her. Paul
shot off down another street to go to his room and get
his imiform. “I think Paul Johnson’s an awfully nice boy,
 where did you collect him, Don?” Eveline said in a casual
 tone. “He’s kinder simple . . . unlicked cub kind of a
 kid ... I guess he’s all right ... I got to know him
 when the transport section he was in was billeted near us
 up in the Marne . . . Then he got this cush job in the
 Post Despatch Service and now he’s studying at the Sor
          326

764
bonne. .   .   . By Godj he needs It . « . no social Ideas

,  . . Paul stdl thinks it was the stork,”
             must come from near where you came from .  
back home, I mean.”
    ^^Yare, his dad owns a grain elevator In some little
                                                petit bourgeois .     .   . bum en-
tank town or other         .   .  .
vironment . .       . He’s not a bad kid In spite of It . . ,
Damn shame he hasn’t read Marx, something to stiffen hi$
ideas np.” Don made a funny face. ^Hhat goes with you
too, Eveline, but I gave you up as hopeless long ago.
Ornamental but not useful.” They’d stopped and were
talking on the streetcorner under the arcade. ^^Oh, Don,
I think your Ideas are just too tiresome,” she began. He
interrupted, ^^Well, solong, here comes a bus ... I
oughtn’t to ride on a scab bus but It’s too damn far to
walk all the way to the Bastille.” He gave her a kiss.
“Don’t be sore at me.” Eveline waved her hand, “Have a
good time In Vienna, Don.” He jumped on the platform
of the bus as It rumbled past. The last Eveline saw the
woman conductor was trying to push him off because the
bus was complet.
    She went up to her office and tried to look as if she’d
been there all day. At a little before six she walked up the

street to the Crillon and went up to see J.W. Everything
was as usual there, Miss Williams looking chilly and
yellowhaired at her desk, Morton stealthily handing
around tea and petit fours, J.W. deep in talk with a
personage in a cutaway in the embrasure of the window,
halfhidden by the heavy champagnecoiored drapes,
Eleanor in a pearlgrey afternoon dress Eveline had never
seen before, chatting chirpily with three young staffofflcers

in front of the fireplace. Eveline had a cup of tea and
talked about something or other with Eleanor for a mo-
ment, then she said she had an engagement and left.
    In the anteroom she caught Miss Williams’ eye as she

                                                                                      3^7

765
passed. She stopped by her desk a raomcnt: “Busy as ever.
Miss Williams,” she said.
    “Ids better to be busy,” she said. “It keeps a person out
of mischief ... It seems to me that in Paris they waste
a great deal of time ... I never imagined that there
could be a place where people could sit around idle so
much of the time.”
    “The French value their leisure more than anything.”
    “Leisure's all right if you have something to do with

it .   . . but this social life wastes so much of our time .    .  .
People come to lunch and stay all afternoon, I don’t know
what we can do about it ... it makes a very difEcult situa-
tion.” Miss Williams looked hard at Eveline. “I don’t
suppose you have much to do down at the Red Cross any
more, do you. Miss Hutchins?”
    Eveline smiled sweetly. “No, we just live for our leisure
like the French.”
    She walked across the wide asphalt spaces of the place
de la Concorde, without knowing quite what to do with
herself, and turned up the Champs Elysees where the
horsechestnuts were just coming into flower. The general
strike seemed to be about over, because there were a few
cabs on the streets. She sat down on a bench and a cadaver-
ous looking individual in a frock coat sat down beside her
and tried to pick her up. She got up and walked as fast as
she could. At the Rond Point she had to stop to wait for
a bunch of French mounted artillery and two seventyfives
to go past before she could cross the street. The cadaver-
ous man was beside her; he turned and held out his
hand, tipping his hat as he did so, as if he was an old
friend. She muttered, “Oh, it’s just too tiresome,” and
got into a horsecab that was standing by the curb. She
almost thought the man was going to get in too, but he
just stood looking after her scowling as the cab drove off
following the guns as if she was part of the regiment.

         3^8

766
Once at home she made herself some cocoa on the gasstove
and went lonely to bed with a book.
   Next evening when she got back to her apartment Paul
was waiting for her, wearing a new uniform and with a
resplendent shine on his knobtoed shoes. “Why, Paul, you
look as if you’d been through a washing machine.” “A
friend of mine’s a sergeant in the quartermaster’s stores

.  . . coughed up a new outfit.” “You look too beautiful
for words.” “You mean you do, Eveline.”
   They went over to the boulevards and had dinner on
the salmoncolored plush seats among the Pompeian col-
umns at Noel Peters’ to the accompaniment of slithery
violinmusic. Paul had his month’s pay and commutation
of rations in his pocket and felt fine. They talked about
what they’d do when they got back to America. Paul
said his dad wanted him to go into a gram broker’s office
in Minneapolis, but he wanted to try his luck in New
York. He thought a young feller ought to try a lot of
things before he settled down at a business so that he
could find out what he was fitted for. Eveline said she
didn’t know what she wanted to do. She didn’t want to
do anything she’d done before, she knew that, maybe she’d
like to live in Paris.
    “I didn’t like it much in Paris before,” Paul said, “but
like this, goin’ out with you, I like it fine.” Eveline teased
him, “Oh, I don’t think you like me much, you never act

as if you did.” “But jeeze, Eveline, you know so much and
you’ve been around so much. It’s mighty nice of you to
let me come around at all, honestly I’ll appreciate it all
my life.”
    “Oh, I wish you wouldn’t be like that ... I hate
people to be humble,” Eveline broke out angrily.
    They went on eating in silence. They were eating as-
paragus with grated cheese on it. Paul took several gulps
of wine and looked at her in a hurt dumb way she hated.
“Oh, 1 feel like a party tcmight,” she said a little later.

767
^^IVe been so miserable all day, Paul    .  .  . I’ll tell you
about it sometime . . . you know the kind of feeling
when everything you’ve wanted crumbles in your fingers
as you grasp it.” ^^All right, Eveline,” Paul said, banging
with his fist on the table, ^det’s cheer up and have a big
time,”
   When they were drinking coffee the orchestra began
to play polkas and people began to dance among the tables
encouraged by cries of Ah Polkaah aaah from the violinist.

It was a fine sight to see the middleaged diners whirling
around under the beaming eyes of the stout Italian head-
waiter who seemed to feel that la gaite was coming back
to Paree at last. Paul and Eveline forgot themselves and
tried to dance it too. Paul was very awkward, but having
his arms around her made her feel better somehow, made
her forget the scaring loneliness she felt.
   When the polka had subsided a little Paul paid the fat
check and they went out arm in arm, pressing close against
each other like all the Paris lovers, to stroll on the boule-
vards in the May evening that smelt of wine and hot rolls
and wild strawberries. They felt lightheaded. Eveline
kept smiling. "^Come on, let’s have a big time,” whispered
Paul occasionally as if to keep his courage up. “I was just
thinking what my friends ud think if they saw me walking
up the Boulevard arm in arm with a drunken dough-
boy,” Eveline said. ^^No, honest, I’m not drunk,” said
Paul.        can drink a lot more than you think. And I
won’t be in the army much longer, not if this peace treaty
goes through.” ^^Oh, I don’t care,” said Eveline,         don’t
care what happens.”
    They heard music in another cafe and saw the shadows
of dancers passing across the windows upstairs. ^^Let’s go
up there,” said Eveline. They went in and upstairs to
ihe dancehail that was a long room full of mirrors. There
Eveline said she wanted to drink some Rhine wine. They
studied the card a long while and finally with a funny

         330

768
sideways look at Paul, she suggested liebefraumilch. Paul
got red, “I wish I had a hebe frau,” he said. “Why, prob-
ably you have .   , . one in every port,” said Eveline. He
shook his head.
   Next time they danced he held her very tight. He
didn’t seem so awkward as he had before. “I feel pretty
lonely myself, these days,” said Eveline when they sat
down again. ‘'You, lonely .      . . with the whole of the
Peace Conference running after you, and the A.E.F.
too .  . . Why, Don told me you’re a dangerous woman.”
She shrugged her shoulders, “When did Don find that
out? Maybe you could be dangerous too, Paul.”
    Next time they danced she put her cheek against his.
When the music stopped he looked as if he was going to
kiss her, but he didn’t. “This is the most wonderful eve-
ning I ever had in my life,” he said, “I wish I was the
kind of guy you really wanted to have take you out.”
“Maybe you could get to be, Paul . . . you seem to be
learning fast. ... No, but we’re acting silly ... I hate
ogling and flirting around ... I guess I want the moon

.  . . maybe I want to get married and have a baby.”
Paul was embarrassed. They sat silent watching the other
dancers. Eveline saw a young French soldier lean over and
kiss the little girl, he was dancing with on the lips; kissing,
they kept on dancing. Eveline wished she was that girl.
“Let’s have a little more wine,” she said to Paul. “Do you
think we’d better? All right, what the hec, we’re having a
big time.”
    Getting in the taxicab Paul was pretty drunk, laughing
and hugging her. As soon as they were in the darkness of
the back of the taxi they started kissing. Evehne held Paul

off for a minute, “Let’s go to your place instead of mine,”
she said. “Pm afraid of my concierge.” “All right . . .

It’s awful little,” said Paul, giggling. “But ish gebibbel,
we should worry get a wrinkle.”
    'When they had gotten past the bitter eyes that sized

769
them up of the old man who kept the keys at Paulas hotel
they sta/:^gered up a long chilly winding stair and into a

little room that gave on a court.              a great life if you
don^t v/eaken,” said Paul, waving his arms after he’d
locked and bolted the door. It had started to ram again
and the rain made the sound of a waterfall on the glass
roof at the bottom of the court. Paul threw his hat and
tunic in th e corner of the room and came towards her, his
eyes shining.
   They’d hardly gotten to bed when he fell asleep with
his Lead on her shoulder. She slipped out of bed to turn
the light off and open the window and then snuggled shiv-
enng against his body that was warm and relaxed like a
child’s. Outside the rain poured down on the glass roof.
There was a puppy shut up somewhere in the building
that whined and yelped desperately without stopping.
Eveline couldn’t get to sleep. Something shut up inside
her was whining like the puppy. Through the window she
began to see the dark peak of a roof and chimneypots
against a fading purple sky. Finally she fell asleep.
    Next day they spent together. She’d phoned in to the
Red Cross that she was sick as usual and Paul forgot about
the Sorbonne altogether. They sat all morning in the
faint sunshine at a cafe near the Madeleine making plans
about what they’d do. They’d get themselves sent back
home as soon as they possibly could and get jobs in New
York and get married. Paul was going to study engineer-
ing in his spare time. There was a firm of grain and feed
merchants in Jersey City, friends of his father’s he knew
he could get a job with. Eveline could start up her dec-
orating business again. Paul was happy and confident and
had lost his apologetic manner. Eveline kept telling her-
self that Paul had stuff in him, that she was in love with
Paul, that something could be made out of Paul.
    The rest of the month of May they were both a little
lightheaded all the time. They spent all their pay the first

         33^

770
few days so that they had to eat at little table d’hote res«
taurants crowded with students and working people and
poor clerks where they bought books of tickets that gave
them a meal for two francs or two fifty. One Sunday m
June they went out to St. Germain and walked through
the forest. Eveline had spells of nausea and weakness
and had to lie down on the grass several times. Paul
looked worned sick. At last they got to a little settlement
on the bank of the Seine. The Seine flowed fast streaked
with green and lilac in the afternoon light, brimming the
low banks bordered by ranks of huge poplars. They
crossed a little ferry rowed by an old man that Eveline
called Father Time. Halfway over she said to Paul,
you know what’s the matter with me, PauP Pm going to
have a baby.”
   Paul let his breath out in a whistle. “Well, I hadn’t just
planned for that ... I guess Pve been a stinker not
to make you marry me before this. . . . We’ll get mar-
ried right away. Pll find out what you have to do to get
permission to get married in the A.E.F. I guess it’s all
right, Eveline .     . . but, gee, it does change my plans.”
   They’d reached the other bank and walked up through
Conflans to the railroad station to get the train back to
Paris. Paul looked worried. “Well, don’t you think it
changes my plans too?” said Eveline dryly. “It’s going
over Niagara Falls in a barrel, that’s what it is.”
    “Eveline,” said Paul seriously with tears in              eyes,
“what can I ever do to make it up to you? .           . honest.

I’ll do my best.” The train whistled and rumbled into the
platform in front of them. They were so absorbed in their
thoughts they hardly saw it. When they’d climbed into a
third class compartment they sat silent bolt upright facing
each other, their knees touching, looking out of the win-
dow without seeing the suburbs of Paris, not saying any-
thing. At last Eveline said with a tight throat, “I want
to have the little brat, Paul, we have to go through every-

                                                                             333

771
thing in life.” Paul nodded. Then she couldn^t see liis
face anymore. The train had gone into a tunnel.




                                               NEWSREEL XXXIV


WHOLE WORLD IS SHORT OF PLATINUM

        II serait Crimmel de Negliger Les Interets Frangais dans
les Balkans
                                   KILLS SELF IN CELL

        the quotation of United Cigar Stores made this month ot
$167 per share means $501 per share for the old stock upon
which piesent stockholders are receiving 27% per share as
formerly held. Through peace and war it has maintained and
increased its dividends

                 6 TRAPPED ON UPPER FLOOR
        How are you goin^ to keef ^em down on the farm
        After they^ve seen Paree

        If Wall street needed the treaty, which means if the
business interests of the country properly desired to know to
what extent we are being committed in affairs which do not
concern us, why should it take the trouble to corrupt the
tagrag and bobtail which forms Mr. Wilson’s following in
Parish

ALLIES URGE MAGYAR PEOPLE TO UPSET
                           BELA KUN REGIME

             II WOMEN MISSING IN BLUEBEARD MYSTERY

         Enfin La France Achete les stocks Americains

        How are you goin* to keef ^em away from Broadway
                                       Jazzin^ around
                                               Paintird the town

          334

772
                                                                                           ^




       the boulevards during the afternoon presented an un«
wonted aspect. The cafe terraces in most cases were deserted
and had been cleared of their tables and chairs. At some of
the cafes customers were admitted one by one and served by
faithful waiters, who, however, had discarded their aprons
   YEOMANETTE SHRIEKS FOR FORMER
            SUITOR AS SHE SEEKS DEATH
                    IN DRIVE APARTMENT
    DESIRES OF HEDJAZ STIR PARIS CRITICS
       m order not prematurely to show their colors a pretense
                                                               in reality however,
is made of disbanding a few formations 5
these troops are being transferred lock stock and barrel to
Kolchak
        LW.W. IN PLOT TO KILL WILSON
                 Find 10,000 Bags of Decayed Onions
   FALL ON STAIRS KILLS WEALTHY CITIZEN

       the mistiness of the weather hid the gunboat from sighc
soon after it left the dock, but the President continued to wave
his hat and smile as the boat headed towards the George
Washington
     OVERTHROW OF SOVIET RULE SURE



                       THE HOUSE OF MORGAN


        I commit my soul into the hands of my savior
wrote John Pierpont Morgan in his will, in full con-

fdance that having redeemed it and washed it in His
most precious bloody He will present it faultless before
my heavenly fathery and I intreat my children to main-

tain and defend at all hazard and at any cost of personal

sacrifice the blessed doctrine of complete atonement for

                                                                              335

773
sin through the blood of Jesus Christ once offered and
through that alone,
        and into the hands of the House of Morgan repre-
sented by his son,
        he committed,
        when he died in Rome in 1913,
        the control of the Morgan interests in New York,
Paris and London, four national banks, three trust com-
panies, three life insurance companies, ten railroad sys-
tems, three street railway companies, an express com-
pany, the International Mercantile Marine,
        power,
        on the cantilever principle, through interlocking
directorates
        over eighteen other railroads, U.S. Steel, General
Electric, American Tel and Tel, five major industries;
        the interwoven cables of the Morgan Stillman
Baker combination held credit up like a suspension
bridge, thirteen percent of the banking resources of the
world.

        The first Morgan to make a pool was Joseph
Morgan, a hotelkeeper in Hartford Connecticut who
organized stagecoach lines and bought up iEtna Life
Insurance stock in a time of panic caused by one of the
big New York fires in the 1830’s;
        his son Junius followed in his footsteps, first in
the drygoods business, and then as partner to George
Peabody, a Massachusetts banker who built up an enor-
mous underwriting and mercantile business in London
and became a friend of Queen Victoria;
        Junius married the daughter of John Pierpont, a
Boston preacher, poet, eccentric, and abolitionist; and
their eldest son,
        John Pierpont Morgan
        arrived in New York to make his fortune

         336

774
        after being trained in England, going to school at
Vevey, proving himself a crack mathematician at the
University of Gottingen,
        a lanky morose young man of twenty,
        just in time for the panic of ’57.
        (war and panics on the stock exchange, bank-
ruptcies, warloans, good growing weather for the House
of Morgan.)

        When the guns started booming at Fort Sumter,
young Morgan turned some money over reselling con-
demned muskets to the U.S. army and began to make
himself felt in the gold room in downtown New York}
there was more in trading in gold than in trading in
                so much for the Civil War.
muskets }
        During the Franco-Prussian war Junius Morgan
floated a huge bond issue for the French government
at Tours.
        At the same time young Morgan was fighting Jay
Cooke and the German-Jew bankers in Frankfort over
the funding of the American war debt (he never did
like the Germans or the Jews).
        The panic of ’75 ruined Jay Cooke and made J.
                                                                                        ho
Pierpont Morgan the boss croupier of Wall Street 5
united with the Philadelphia Drexels and built tht.
Drexel building where for thirty years he sat in hi?
glassedin office, redfaced and insolent, writing at his
desk, smoking great black cigars, or, if important issues
                                                                                        he
were involved, playing solitaire in his inner office j
was famous for his few words. Yes or No, and for his
way of suddenly blowing up in a visitor’s face and for

that special gesture of the arm that meant. What do 1
get out of it?
         In ’77 Junius Morgan retired} J. Pierpont got
himself made a member of the board of directors of the
New York Central railroad and launched the first

                                                                              337

775
Corsair. He liked yachting and to have pretty actresses
call him Commodore.
        He founded the Lying-in Hospital on Stuyvesant
Square, and was fond of going into St. George’s church
and singing a hymn all alone in the afternoon quiet.
        In the panic of ’93
        at no inconsiderable profit to himself
        Morgan saved the U.S. Treasury5 gold was drain-
ing out, the country was ruined, the farmers were howl-
ing for a silver standard, Grover Cleveland and his
cabinet were walking up and down in the blue room at
the White House without being able to come to a
decision, in Congress they were making speeches while
                                                                                     poor
the gold reserves melted in the Subtreasuries 5
people were starving; Coxey’s army was marching to
Washington; for a long time Grover Cleveland couldn’t
bring himself to call in the representative of the Wall
Street moneymasters; Morgan sat in his suite at the
Arlington smoking cigars and quietly playing solitaire
until at last the president sent for him;
        he had a plan all ready for stopping the gold
hemorrhage.

        After that what Morgan said went; when Carnegie
sold out he built the Steel Trust.

        J. Pierpont Morgan was a bullnecked irascible
man with small black magpie’s eyes and a growth on his
          he let his partners work themselves to death over
nose ;
the detailed routine of banking, and sat in his back
office smoking black cigars; when there was something
to be decided he said Yes or No or just turned his back
and went back to his solitaire.

        Every Christmas his librarian read him Dickens’
4 Christmas Carol from the original manuscript.
        He was fond of canarybirds and pekinese dogs

        338

776
and liked to take pretty actresses yachting. Each
Corsair was a finer vessel than the last.
        When he dined with King Edward he sat at His
Majesty’s rights he ate with the Kaiser tete-a-tete; he
liked talking to cardinals or the pope, and never missed
a conference of Episcopal bishops;
        Rome was his favorite city.

        He liked choice cookery and old wines and pretty
women and yachting, and going over his collections, now
and then picking up a jewelled snuffbox and staring at

it with his magpie’s eyes.
        He made a collection of the autographs of the
rulers of France, owned glass cases full of Babylonian
tablets, seals, signets, statuettes, busts,
        Gallo-Roman bronzes,
        Merovingian jewels, miniatures, watches, tapes-
tries, porcelains, cuneiform inscriptions, paintings by all
the old masters, Dutch, Italian, Flemish, Spanish,
         manuscripts of the gospels and the Apocalypse,
         a collection of the works of Jean-Jacques Rousseau,
         and the letters of Pliny the Younger.
         His collectors bought anything that was expensive
or rare or had the glint of empire on it, and he had it
brought to him and stared hard at it with his magpie’s
eyes. Then it was put in a glass case.
         The last year of his life he went up the Nile on a
 dahabiyeh and spent a long time staring at the great
 columns of the Temple of Karnak.
         The panic of 1907 and the death of Harriman, his
 great opponent in railroad financing, in 1 909, had left
 him the undisputed ruler of Wall Street, most power-
 ful private citizen in the world;
         an old man tired of the purple, suffering from
 gout, he had deigned to go to Washington to answer the
 questions of the Pujo Committee during the Money

                                                                               339

777
Trust Investigation; Yes, I did what seemed to me to
be for the best interests of the country.
        So admirably was his empire built that his death
in 1913 hardly caused a ripple in the exchanges of the
world: the purple descended to his son, J. P. Morgan,
        who had been trained at Groton and Harvard and
by associating with the British ruling class

        to be a more constitutional monarch : J. P, Morgan
suggests . . .

        By 1917 the Allies had borrowed one billion, nine-
hundred million dollars through the House of Mor-
gan: we went overseas for democracy and the flagj
        and by the end of the Peace Conference the phrase

J. P. Morgan suggests had compulsion over a power of
seventyfour billion dollars.

        J. P. Morgan is a silent man, not given to public
utterances, but during the great steel strike, he wrote
Gary: Heartfelt congratulations on your stand for the
open sho'py with which I am, as you know, absolutely in
accord, I believe American frincifles of liberty are
deeply involved, and must win if we stand firm.
        (Wars and panics on the stock exchange,
        machinegunfire and arson,
        bankruptcies, warloans,
        starvation, lice, cholera and typhus:
        good growing weather for the House of Morgan.)



                                             NEWSREEL XXXV


        the Grand Prix de la Victoire, run yesterday for fifty-
second time was an event that will long remain in the mem-
ories of those present, for never in the history of the classic
race has Longchamps presented such a glorious scene

         340

778
                         K.ee'p the hottie jifes burning
                         Till the boys come home
        LEVIATHAN UNABLE TO PUT TO SEA

                  BOLSHEVIKS ABOLISH POSTAGE STAMPS
      ARTIST TAKES GAS IN NEW HAVEN
               FIND BLOOD ON $i BILL

                         While our hearts are yearning

                   POTASH CAUSE OF BREAK IN PARLEY
                MAJOR DIES OF POISONING

                     TOOK ROACH SALTS BY MISTAKE

        riot and robbery developed into the most awful pogrom
ever heard of. Within two or three days the Lemberg ghetto
was turned into heaps of smoking debris. Eyewitnesses esti-
mate that the Polish soldiers killed more than a thousand Jew-
ish men and women and children

LENINE SHOT BY TROTSKY IN DRUNKEN
                                          BRAWL

        you know where I stand on beer, said Brisbane in seek-
ing assistance

                          Though the boys are far away
                              They, long for horne
                          Thera^s a silver lining
                              Through the dark clouds shining

  PRESIDENT EVOKES CRY OF THE DEAD

                    LETTER CLEW TO BOMB OUTRAGE

        Emile Deen in the preceding three installments of liis

interview described the situation between the Royal Dutch and
the Standard Oil Company, as being the beginning of a struggle
for the control of the markets of the world which was only
halted by the war. “The basic factors,’^ he said, ^‘are envy,

                                                                                      341

779
discontent and suspicion.” The extraordinary industrial
growth of our nation since the Civil War, the opening up of
new territory, the development of resources, the rapid increase
in population, all these things have resulted in the creation of
many big and sudden fortunes. Is there a mother, father,
sweetheart, relative or friend of any one of the two million
boys fighting abroad who does not thank God that Wall Street
contributed H. P. Davidson to the Red Cross'^

                 BOND THIEF MURDERED

                       Turn the bright side inside out
                           Till the boys come home



                               THE CAMERA EYE (39)


        daylight enlarges out of ruddy quiet very faintly

throbbing wanes into my sweet darkness broadens red

through the warm blood weighting the lids warmsweetly

then snaps on

        enormously blue yellow pink

        today is Paris        pink sunlight hazy on the clouds

against patches of robinsegg a tiny siren hoots shrilly

traffic drowsily rumbles clatters over the cobbles taxis

squawk       the yellow’s the comforter through the open

window the Louvre emphasizes its sedate architecture of

greypink stone between the Seine and the sky

        and the certainty of Paris

        the towboat shiny green and red chugs against the

 current towing three black and mahoganyvarnished

         34.2

780
barges their deckhouse windows have green shutters and

lace curtains and pots of geraniums in flower          to get

under the bridge a fat man in blue had to let the little

black stack drop flat to the deck

       Paris comes into the room in the servantgirPs eyes

the warm bulge of her breasts under the grey smock   the

smell of chickory in coffee scalded milk and the shine that

crunches on the crescent rolls stuck with little dabs of very

sweet unsalted butter

       in the yellow paperback of the book that halfhides the

agreeable countenance of my friend

       Paris of 1919

       paris-mutuel

        roulettewheel that spins round the Tour Eiffel red

square white square a million dollars a billion marks a

trillion roubles baisse du franc or a mandate for Mont-

martre

        Cirque Medrano the steeplechase gravity of cellos

tuning up on the stage at the Salle Gaveau oboes and a tri-

angle         la musique s’en fout de moi says the old

marchioness jingling with diamonds as she walks out on

Stravinski but the red colt took the jumps backwards and

we lost all our money

        la peinture opposite the Madeleine Cezanne Picasso

Modigliani

        Nouvelle Athenes
        h Doesle of manifestos always freshtinted on the kiosks

                                                                              343

781
and slogans scrawled in chalk on the urinals L’UNION
DES TRAVAILLEURS FERA LA PAIX DU
MONDE

       revolution round the spinning Eiffel Tower

       that burns up our last yearns diagrams the dates fiy

off the calendar we^ll make everything new today is the

Year I Today is the sunny morning of the first day of

spring We gulp our coffee splash water on us jump

into our clothes run downstairs step out wideawake into

the first morning of the first day of the first year



                                          NEWSREEL XXXVI


               TO THE GLORY OF FRANCE ETERNAL
           Oh a German officer crossed the Rhine
               Parleyvoo

       Germans Beaten at Riga Grateful Parisians Cheer Mar-
shals of France

           Oh a German officer crossed the Rhine
           He liked the women and loved the wine
               Hankyfanky farleyvoo

     PITEOUS PLAINT OF WIFE TELLS OF
                             RIVAUS WILES

        Wilson’s Arnval in Washington Starts Trouble. Paris
strikers hear harangues at picnic. Cafe wrecked and bombs
thrown in Fiume streets. Parisians pay more for meat. II
Serait Dangereux d’Augmenter les Vivres. Bethmann Hol-
weg’s Blood Boils. Mysterious Forces Halt Antibolshevist
March.

        344

782
              HUN’S HAND SEEN IN PLOTS
             (Dh I^ud^STnotsclle       j^TTtisfiti^cs
                Parleyvoo
            Oh Mademoiselle from Armentieres
                Parleyvoo
            Hash'dt been          for forty years
                Hankyfanky farleyvoo

        wrecks mark final day at La Baule; syndicated wage
earners seize opportunity to threaten employers unprepared
for change. LAYS WREATH ON TOMB OF LAFAY-
ETTE. Richest Negress is Dead. Yale Dormitories stormed
by Angry Mob of Soldiers. Goldmine in Kinks.
             TIGHTENS SCREW ON BERLIN
            Oh he took her ufstairs and into bed
            And there he cracked her maidenhead
                Hanky'panky farleyvoo
NO DROP IN PRICES TO FOLLOW PEACE SAl'
                                   BUSINESS MEN

                      Kills Self at Desk in Office

    MODERN BLUEBEARD NOW VICTIM OF MELANCHOLIA

        He is none other than General Minus of the old Russian
Imperial General Staff, who, during the Kerensky regime, was
commander of troops in the region of Minsk. Pans policemen
threaten to join strike movement, allow it to send into France
barrels bearing the mystic word Mistelles. One speculator is

said to have netted nearly five million francs within a week.

             Oh the first three months and all went well
             But the second three months she began to swell
                 Hankyfanky farleyvoo

         large financial resources, improved appliances and abun-
dant raw materials of Amenca should assist French genius in

restoring and increasing industrial power of France, joining
hands in the charming scenery, wonderful roads, excellent

hotels, and good cookery makes site of Lyons fair crossed by

                                                                                      345

783
the 45th parallel. Favored by great mineral resources its future
looms incalculably splendid. Any man who attempts to take
over control of municipal functions here will be shot on sight,
Mayor Ole Hanson remarked. He is a little man himself but
has big ideas, a big brain, and big hopes. Upon first meeting
him one is struck by his resemblance to Mark Twain



     RICHARD ELLSWORTH SAVAGE


    Dick and Ned felt pretty rocky the morning they sighted
Fire Island lightship. Dick wasn’t looking forward to land-
ing in God’s Country with no money and the draft board
to face, and he was worried about how his mother was
going to make out. All Ned was complaimng about was
wartime prohibition. They were both a little jumpy from
all the cognac they’d drunk on the trip over. They were
already in the slategreen shallow seas off Long Island j
no help for it now. The heavy haze to the west and then
the low boxlike houses that looked as if they were drowned
m the water and then the white strip of beach of the Rock-
awaysj the scenicrailways of Coney Islandj the full green
summer trees and the grey framehouses with their white
                                    it was all heartbreakingly like home.
trim on Staten Island j
When the immigration tug came alongside Dick was sur-
prised to see Hiram Halsey Cooper, in khaki uniform and
puttees, clambering up the steps. Dick lit a cigarette and
tried to look sober.
    ^^My boy, it’s a great relief to see you. . . , Your
mother and I have been . . . er . . .” Dick Interrupted
to introduce him to Ned. Mr. Cooper, who was in the
uniform of a major, took him by the sleeve and drew him
up the deck. ^^Better put on your uniform to land.” ^^All
right, sir, I thought it looked rather shabby.” ^^All the
better. . . . Well, I suppose it’s hell over there . . . and

         346

784
no chance for courting the muse, eh? . . . You’re coming
up to Washington with me tonight. WeVe been very un-
easy about you, but that’s all over now . . . made me
realize what a lonely old man I am. Look here, my boy,
your mother was the daughter of Major General Ells-
worth, isn’t that so?” Dick nodded.             course she must
have been because my dear wife was his niece. . . . Well,
hurry and put your uniform on and remember . . . leave
all the talking to me.”
   While he was changing into the old Norton-Harjes
uniform Dick was thinking how suddenly Mr. Cooper had
aged and wondering just how he could ask him to lend him
fifteen dollars to pay the bill he’d run up at the bar.
   New York had a funny lonely empty look in the
                                               well here he was home. At
summer afternoon sunlight j
the Pennsylvania station there were policemen and plain-
clothes men at all the entrances demanding the registra-
tion cards of all the young men who were not in uniform.
As he and Mr. Cooper ran for the train he caught sight oi
a dejectedlooking group of men herded together in a cor-
ner hemmed by a cordon of sweating cops. When they
got in their seats in the parlorcar on the Congressional
Mr. Cooper mopped his face with a handkerchief. ^^You
understand why I said to put your uniform on. Well, ]
suppose it was hell?”
    ^^Some of it was pretty bad,” said Dick casually. “1

hated to come back though.”
    “I know you did, my boy. ... You didn’t expect to

find your old mentor in the uniform of a major . .       . well,
we must all put our shoulders to the wheel. I’m in the
purchasing department of Ordnance. You see the chief of
                                                                     he turns out to
our bureau of personnel is General Sykes 5
have served with your grandfather. I’ve told him about
you, your experience on two fronts, your knowledge of
languages and , . . well  . . naturally he’s very much

                                                                               347

785
interested. ... I think we can get you a commission
right away.”
    ^^Mr. Cooper, it^s . . .” stammered Dick, ^ht’s extraor-

dinarily decent . . . damn kind of you to interest yourself
m me this way.”
    “My boy, I didn’t realize how I missed you         .  .  . our
chats about the muse and the ancients . .  . until you had
gone.” Mr. Cooper’s voice was drowned out by the roar
of the train. Well, here I am home, something inside
Dick’s head kept saying to him.
    When the train stopped at the West Philadelphia sta-
tion the only sound was the quiet droning of the electric
fans, Mr. Cooper leaned over and tapped Dick’s knee,
“Only one thing you must promise ... no more peace
talk till we win the war. When peace comes we can put
some in our poems. . . . Then’ll be the time for us all
to work for a lasting peace. ... As for that little incident

in Italy   . .  . it’s nothing . .     . forget it    .  .  . nobody ever
heard of it.” Dick nodded, it made him sore to feel that
he was blushing. They neither of them said anything until
the waiter came through calling, “Dinner now being
served in the dining car forward.”
    In Washington (now you are home, something kept
saying in Dick’s head) Mr. Cooper had a room in the
Willard where he put Dick up on the couch as the hotel
was full and it was impossible to get another room any-
where. After he’d rolled up in the sheet Dick heard Mr.
Cooper tiptoe over and stand beside the couch breathing
hard. He opened his eyes and grinned. “Well, my boy,”
said Mr. Cooper, “it’s nice to have you home .       . . sleep
well,” and he v/ent back to bed.
    Next morning he was introduced to General Sykes:
“This is the young man who wants to serve his country,”
said Mr. Cooper with a flourish, “as his grandfather served
it. . . . In fact he was so impatient that he went to war
before his country did, and enlisted in the volunteer ambu-

         348

786
lance service with the French and afterwards with the

Italians.” General Sykes was a little old man with bright
eyes and a hawk nose and extremely deaf. ^^Yes, Ellsworth
was a great fellow, we campaigned against Hieronimo to-
gether .  . . Ah, the old west ... I was only fourteen at
Gettysburg and damme I don’t think he was there at all.
We went through West Point in the same class after the
war, poor old Ellsworth. ... So you’ve smelled powder
have you, my boy?” Dick colored and nodded.
   “You see, General,” shouted Mr. Cooper, “he feels he
wants some more . .  . er .    . , responsible work than was
possible in the ambulance service.”
   “Yessiree, no place for a highspirited young fellow.

. .   . You know Andrews, Major . . The General was
scribbling on a pad. “Take him to see Colonel Andrews
with this memorandum and he’ll fix him up, has to decide
on qualifications etc. ... You understand              .  .   . good
luck, my boy.” Dick managed a passable salute and they
were out in the corridor^ Mr. Cooper was smiling broadly.
“Well, that’s done. I must be getting back to my office.
You go and fill out the forms and take your medical exami-
nation ... or perhaps that’ll be at the camp           . . . Any-
way come and lunch with me at the Willard at one. Come
up to the room.” Dick saluted smiling.
    He spent the rest of the morning filling out blanks.
After lunch he went down to Atlantic City to see his
mother. She looked just the same. She was staying in a
boarding house at the Chelsea end and was very much
exercised about spies. Henry had enlisted as a private
in the infantry and was somewhere in France. Mother said

it made her blood boil to think of the grandson of General
Ellsworth being a mere private, but that she felt confident
he’d soon rise from the ranks. Dick hadn’t heard her
speak of her father since she used to talk about him when
he was a child, and asked her about him. He had died
when she was quite a little girl leaving the family not too

                                                                               349

787
well off considering their station in life. All she remem-
bered was a tall man in blue with a floppy felt hat caught
up on one side and a white goatee, when she’d first seen a
cartoon of Uncle Sam she’d thought it was her father. He
always had hoarhound drops in a little silver bonbonniere
in his pocket, she’d been so excited about the military
funeral and a nice kind army officer giving her his handker-
chief. She’d kept the bonbonniere for many years but it
had had to go with everything else when your poor father

.  .  . er .   .  . failed.
   A week later Dick received a war department envelope
addressed to Savage, Richard Ellsworth, 2nd Lieut. Ord.
Dept., enclosing his commission and ordering him to pro-
                                               within 24 hours. Dick found
ceed to Camp Merritt, N. J.,
himself in charge of a casuals company at Camp Merritt
and wouldn’t have known what on earth to do if it hadn’t
been for the sergeant. Ouce they were on the transport it
was better, he had what had been a first class cabin with
two other 2nd Lieutenants and a Majors Dick had the drop
on them all because he’d been at the front. The transport
was the Leviathan; Dick began to feel himself again when
he saw the last of Sandy Hookj he wrote Ned a long letter
in doggerel that began:

liis father was a jailbird and his mother had no kale
He was much too fond of cognac and he drank it by the pail
But now he’s a Second Lieut and supported by the State
Sports a handsome uniform and a military gait
And this is the most terrific fate that ever can befall
A boy whose grandpa was a Major-General.

    The other two shavetails in the cabin were nondescript
youngsters from Leland Stanford, but Major Thompson
was a Westpointer and stiff as a ramrod. He was a middle-
aged man with a yellow round face, thin lips and nose-
glasses. Dick thawed him out a little by getting him a
;jint of whiskey through his sergeant who’d gotten chummy

         350

788
with the stewards, when he got seasick two days out, and
discovered that he was a passionate admirer of Kipling and
had heard Copeland read Dmfpy Deever and been very
much impressed. Furthermore he was an expert on mules
and horseflesh and the author of a monograph : The Span-'

ish Horse, Dick admitted that he^d studied with Copeland
and somehow it came out that he was the grandson of the

late General Ellsworth. IMajor Thompson began to take
an interest in him and to ask him questions about the don-
keys the French used to carry ammunition in the trenches,
Italian cavalry horses and the works of Rudyard Kipling.
The night before they reached Brest when everybody was
flustered and the decks were all dark and silent for the
zone, Dick went into a toilet and reread the long kidding
letter he’d written Ned first day out. He tore it up into
small bits, dropped them in the can and then flushed it
carefully: no more letters.
    In Brest Dick took three majors downtown and ordered
them a meal and good wine at the hotels during the eve-
ning Major Thompson told stories about the Philippines
                                     after the fourth bottle Dick taught
and the Spanish war 5
them all to sing Mademoiselle from Armentieres, K few
days later he was detached from his casuals company and
sent to Tours, Major Thompson, who felt he needed
somebody to speak French for him and to talk about
Kipling with, had gotten him transferred to his ofSce. It
was a relief to see the last of Brest, where everybody was
in a continual grouch from the drizzle and the mud and
 the discipline and the saluting and the formations and the
 fear of getting in wrong with the brasshats.
     Tours was full of lovely" creamystone buildings buried in
 dense masses of bluegreen late summer foliage. Dick was
 on commutation of rations and boarded with an agreeable
 old woman who brought him up his cafe au lait in bed
 every morning. He got to know a fellow in the Personnel
 Department through whom he began to work to get Heruy

                                                                                351

789
transferred out of the infantry. He and Major Thompson
and old Colonel Edgecombe and several other officers
                                             they got so they couldn’t do
dined together very often 3
without Dick who knew how to order a meal comme il

faut, and the proper vintages of wines and could parleyvoo
with the French girls and make up limericks and was the
grandson of the late General Ellsworth.
   When the Post Despatch Service was organized as a
separate outfit. Colonel Edgecombe who headed it, got
him away from Major Thompson and his horsedealers^
Dick became one of his assistants with the rank of Captain.
Immediately he managed to get Henry transferred from
the officers’ school to Tours, It was too late though to get
him more than a first lieutenancy.
   When Lieutenant Savage reported to Captain Savage
in his office he looked brown and skinny and sore. That
evening they drank a bottle of white wine together in
Dick’s room. The first thing Henry said when the door
closed behind them was, ^Well, of all the goddam lousy
grafts ... I don’t know whether to be proud of the
little kid brother or to sock him in the eye.”
   Dick poured him a drink. ^Tt must have been Mother’s
doing,” he said. ^^Honestly, I’d forgotten that granpa was
a general.”
    ^Tf you knew what us guys at the front used to say
about the S.O.S.”
    ^^But somebody’s got to handle the supplies and the
ordnance and  
    ^^And the mademosels and the vin blanc,” broke in
Henry.
    ^^Sure, but I’ve been very virtuous. , . . Your little
brother’s minding his p’s and q’s, and honestly I’ve been
working like a nigger.”
    ^Writing loveletters for ordnance majors, I bet. . . ^
Hell, you can’t beat it. He lands with his nose in the but-
ter every time. . . . Anyway I’m glad there’s one suc-t

         352

790
cessful member of the family to carry on the name of the

late General EUsworth.^^
    “Have a disagreeable time in the Argonne?^’
    “Lousy . , . until they sent me back to officers^ school^'
    “We had a swell time there in the ambulance service in


    “Oh, you wouldd’
    Henry drank some more wine and mellowed up a little.
Every now and then heM look around the big room with

its lace curtains and its scrubbed tile floor and its big four-
poster bed and make a popping sound with his lips and
mutter: “Pretty soft.” Dick took him out and set him up
to a fine dinner at his favorite bistro and then went around
and fixed him up with Minette, who was the bestlooking

girl at Madame Patou^s.
    After Henry had gone upstairs, Dick sat in the parlor a
few minutes with a girl they called Dirty Gertie who had
hair dyed red and a big floppy painted mouth, drinking
the bad cognac and feeling blue. “Vous triste?” she said,
and put her clammy hand on his forehead. He nodded.
                                                    penser no good .   . . moi
^Tievre . . . trop penser . . .
aussi.” Then she said she’d kill herself but she was afraid,
not that she believed in God, but that she was afraid of
how quiet it would be after she was dead. Dick cheered her
up, “Bientot guerre finee. Tout le monde content go back
 home.” The girl burst out crying and Madame Patou
came running in screaming and clawing like a seagull.
 She was a heavy woman with an ugly jaw. She grabbed the

girl by the hair and began shaking her. Dick was flustered.
 He managed to make the woman let the girl go back to
 her room, left some money and walked out. He felt ter-

 rible. When he got home he felt like writing some verse.
 He tried to recapture the sweet and heavy pulsing of

 feelings he used to have when he sat down to write a poem.
 But all he could do was just feel miserable so he went to'

 bed. All night half thinking half dreaming he couldn’t

                                                                                353

791
get Dirty Gertie’s face out of his head. Then he began
remembering the times he used to have with Hilda at
Bay Head and had a long conversation with himself about
love: Everything’s so hellishly sordid . . . I’m sick of
whores and chastity, I want to have love affairs. He began
planning what he’d do after the war, probably go home
and get a political job in Jersey^ a pretty sordid prospect.
    He was lying on his back staring at the ceiling that was
livid with dawn when he heard Henry’s voice calling his
                                                     he tiptoed down the cold
name down In the street outside 3
tiled stairs and let him in.
    “Why the hell did you let me go with that girl, Dick?
I feel like a louse , . . Oh Christ . . . mind if I have
half this bed, Dick? I’ll get me a room in the morning.”
Dick found him a pair of pyjamas and made himself small
on his side of the bed. “The trouble with you, Henry,” he
said, 3^awning, “is that you’re just an old Puritan . .   . you
ought to be more continental.”
    “I notice you didn’t go with any of those bitches your-
self.”
    “I haven’t got any morals but I’m finnicky, my dear,
Epicurus’ owne sonne,” Dick drawled sleepily.
    “S—t, I feel like a dirty dishrag,” whispered Henry.
Dick closed his eyes and went to sleep.
    Early in October Dick was sent to Brest with a despatch
case that the Colonel said was too important to entrust to
an enlisted man. At Rennes he had to wait two hours for
the train, and was sitting eating in the restaurant when a
doughboy with his arm m a sling came up to him saying,
“Hello, Dick, for crying out loud.” It was Skinny Murray.
“By gosh, Skinny, I’m glad to see you ... it must be
live or six years . . . Gee, we’re getting old. Look, sit
iown .    .  . no, I can’t do that.”
    “I suppose I ought to have saluted, sir,” said Skinny
stiffly.
    “Can that, Skinny ... but we’ve got to find a place to

         354

792
                got any time before your train? You see it’s me
talk- ,  .  .
the M.P.’s would arrest if they saw me eating and drink-

ing with an enlisted man.   . . . Wait around till I’ve fin-

ished my lunch and we’ll find a ginmill across from the

station. I’ll risk it.” “I’ve got an hour         .  . . I’m going to

the Grenoble leave area.”
    “Lucky bastard . . . were you badly wounded, Skin-
ny?” “Piece of shrapnel in the wing, captain,” said Skinny,
coming to attention as a sergeant of M.P.’s stalked stiffly

through the station restaurant. “Those birds gimme the

willies.”
    Dick hurried through his lunch, paid, and walked

across the square outside the station. One of the cafes had

a back room that looked dark and quiet. They were just

settling down to chat over two beers when Dick remem-
bered the despatch case. He’d left it at the table. Whisper-
ing breathlessly that he’d be back he ran across the square
and into the station restaurant. Three French officers were

at the table. “Pardon, messieurs.” It was still where he’d

left it under the table. “If I’d lost that I’d have had to

shoot myself,” he told Skinny. They chatted about Tren-
ton and Philadelphia and Bay Head and Dr. Atwood.
 Skinny was married and had a good job in a Philadelphia

 bank. He had volunteered for the tanks and was winged
 by a bit of shrapnel before the attack started, damn lucky

 for him, because his gang had been wiped out by a black

 maria. He was just out of hospital today and felt pretty
 weak on his pins. Dick took down his service data and said

 he’d get him transferred to Tours; just the kind of fellow

 they needed for a courier. Then Skinny had to run for

 his train, and Dick, with the despatch case tightly wedged
 under his arm, went out to stroll around the town daintily

 colored and faintly gay under the autumn drizzle.
     The rumor of the fake armistice set Tours humming

 like a swarm of bees, there was a lot of drinbng and back-

 slapping and officers and enlisted men danced snakedancea

                                                                                355

793
m and out of the oiEcebuildings. When it turned out to be
a false alarm Dick felt almost relieved. The days that fol-
lowed everybody round the headquarters of the Despatch
Service wore a mysterious expression of knowing more than
they were willing to tell. The night of the real armistice
Dick ate supper a little deliriously with Colonel Edge-
combe and some other officers. After dinner Dick happened
to meet the colonel in the courtyard out back. The colonePs
face was red and his moustache bristled. ^Wellj Savage,

it’s a great day for the race,” he said, and laughed a great
deal. ^^What race?” said Dick shyly. ^The human race,”
roared the colonel.
    Then he drew Dick aside: ^^How would you like to go tc
Paris, my boy? It seems that there’s to be a peace con-
ference in Paris and that President Wilson is going to
attend it in person . . . seems incredible . . . and I’ve
been ordered to put this outfit at the disposal of the Ameri-
can delegation that’s coming soon to dictate the peace, so
we’ll be Peace Conference couriers. Of course I suppose if
you feel you have to go home it could be arranged.”
    ^^Oh, no, sir,” broke in Dick hurriedly. was just be-
ginning to worry about having to go home and look for a
job.  . . . The Peace Conference will be a circus and any
chance to travel around Europe suits me.” The colonel
looked at him with narrowed eyes.       wouldn’t put it just
that way . . . service should be our first thought . . .
naturally what I said is strictly confidential.” ^^Oh, strictly,”
said Dick, but he couldn’t help wearing a grin on his face
when he went back to join the others at the table.




                         and this time in a new whipcord uniform
    Paris again 5
with silver bars at his shoulders and with money in his
pockets* One of the first things he did was to go back to
look at the little street behind the Pantheon where he’d

         356

794
lived with Steve Warner the year before. The tall chalky-
grey houses^ the stores, the little bars, the bigeyed children

in the black smocks, the youngsters in caps with silk hand-

kerchiefs around their necks, the Parisian drawl of the
                                                                          he was won-
argot: it all made him feel vaguely unhappy j
dering what had happened to Steve. It was a relief to get
back to the office where the enlisted men were moving in
newly arrived American rolltop desks and yellow varnished
card index cases.
    The hub of this Pans was the hotel de Crillon on the

place de la Concorde, its artery the rue Royale where
arriving dignitaries. President Wilson, Lloyd George and
the Kling and Queen of the Belgians were constantly parad-
ing escorted by the garde republicaine in their plumed
               Dick began living in a delirium of trips to Brus-
helmets j
sels on the night express, lobster cardinal washed down
with Beaune on the red plush settees at Larue’s, champagne
cocktails at the Ritz bar, talk full of the lowdown over a

                                            it was like the old days of the
demie at the Cafe Weber 5
Baltimore convention, only he didn’t give a damn any
morej it all hit him cockeyed funny.
    One night soon after Christmas, Colonel Edgecombe
took Dick to dinner at Voisin’s with a famous New York
publicity man who was said to be very near to Colonel
House. They stood a moment on the pavement outside the
restaurant to look at the tubby domed church opposite.
^^You see, Savage, this fellow’s the husband of a relative of
mine, one of the Pittsburgh Staples . . . smooth ... it
seems to me. You look him over. For a youngster you seem
to have a keen eye for character.”
    Mr. Moorehouse turned out to be a large quietspoken
blueeyed jowly man with occasionally a touch of the south-
ern senator in his way of talking. With him were a man
named Robbins and a Miss Stoddard, a fraillooking woman
with very transparent alabaster skin and a sharp chirpy
            Dick noticed that she was stunningly welldressedt
voice 5

                                                                               357

795
The restaurant was a little too much like an Episcopal
churchy Dick said very little, was very polite to Miss
Stoddard and kept his eyes and ears open, eating the
grandducal food and carefully tasting the mellow wine
that nobody else seemed to pay any attention to. Miss
Stoddard kept everybody talking, but nobody seemed to
want to commit themselves to saying anything about the
peace conference. Miss Stoddard told with considerable
malice about the furnishings of the hotel de Murat and
the Wilsons^ colored maid and what kind of clothes the
President’s wife, whom she insisted on calling Mrs. Galt,
was wearing. It was a rehef when they got to the cigars
and liqueurs. After dinner Colonel Edgecombe offered to
drop Mr. Moorehouse at the Crillon, as his staffcar had
come for him. Dick and Mr. Robbins took Miss Stoddard
home in a taxicab to her apartment opposite Notre Dame
on the left bank. They left her at her door. “Perhaps you’ll
come around some afternoon to tea, Captain Savage,” she
said.
   The taximan refused to take them any further, said it was
late and that he was bound home to Noisy-le-sec and
drove off. Robbins took hold of Dick’s arm. “Now for
crissake let’s go and have a decent drink.    . . . Boy, I’m
sick of the bigwigs.” “All right,” said Dick, “where’ll we
go?” Walking along the foggy quay, past the shadowy bulk
of Notre Dame, they talked scatteringly about Pans and
how cold it was. Robbins was a short man with an impudent
bossy look on his red face. In the cafe it was only a little
less chilly than in the street. “This climate’s going to be
the death of me,” said Robbins, snuggling his chin down
in his overcoat. “Woolly underwear’s the only answer,
that’s one thing Pve learned in the army,” said Dick
laughing.
     They settled on a plush bench near the stove at the end
 of the cigarsmoky giltornamented room. Robbins ordered
 a bottle of Scotch whiskey, glasses, lemon, sugar and a lot

         358

796
of hot water. It took a long time to get the hot water, so
Robbins poured them each a quarter of a tumbler of the
whiskey straight. When he^d drunk his, his face that had
been sagging and tired, smoothed out so that he looked ten
years younger. ^^Only way to keep warm in this goddam
town’s to keep stewed.” ^^Still Pm glad to be back in

little old Paree,” said Dick, smiling and stretching his legs
out under the table. ^^Only place in the world to be right
at present,” said Robbins. “Paris is the hub of the world

. . . unless it’s Moscow.”
    At the word Moscow a Frenchman playing checkers at
the next table brought his eyes up from the board and
stared at the two Americans. Dick couldn’t make out what

                                   it made him uneasy. The waiter came
there was in his stare 3
with the hot water. It wasn’t hot enough, so Robbins made
a scene and sent it back. He poured out a couple of half-
tumblers of straight whiskey to drink while they were wait-
ing. “Is the President going to recognize the soviets'”’
Dick found himself asking in a low voice.
    “I’m betting on it ... I believe he’s sending an un-

official mission. Depends a little on oil and manganese . . .

it used to be Kdng Coal, but now it’s Emperor Petroleum
and Miss Manganese, queen consort of steel. That’s all in
the pink republic of Georgia ... I hope to get there
soon, they say that they have the finest wine and the most
beautiful women in the world. By God, I got to get
there.  . . . But the oil . . . God damn it, that’s what
this damned idealist Wilson can’t understand, while they’re
setting him up to big feeds at Buckingham palace the jolly
old British army is occupying Mosul, the Karun River,
Persia . . . now the latrine news has it that they’re In
Baku .   .  . the future oil metropolis of the W'orld.”
    “I thought the Baku fields were running dry.”
    “Don’t you believe it .        . I just talked to a fellow
who’d been there ... a funny fellow, Rasmussen, yw

                                                                                ^59

797
ought to meet him.” Dick said hadn^t we got plenty of oil
at home. Robbins banged his fist on the table.
    ^^You never can have plenty of anything . . , that^s the

first law of thermodynamics. I never have plenty of whis-
key, . . . You’re a young fellow, do you ever have plenty
of tail? Well, neither Standard Oil or the Royal Dutch-
Shell can ever have plenty of crude oil.”
   Dick blushed and laughed a little forcedly. He didn’t
like this fellow Robbins. The waiter finally came back with
boiling water and Robbins made them each a toddy. For a
while neither of them said anything. The checkerplayers
had gone. Suddenly Robbins turned to Dick and looked in
his face with his hazy blue drunkard’s eyes: ^Well, what
do you boys think about it all? What do the fellers in the
trenches think?”
    ^^How do you mean?”
    ^^Oh, hell, I don’t mean anything. . . . But if they
thought the war was lousy wait till they see the peace . . ,
Oh, boy, wait till they see the peace.”
    ^^Down at Tours I don’t think anybody thought much
about it either way , . . however, I don’t think that any-
body that’s seen it considers war the prize way of settling
international difficulties ... I don’t think Blackjack
Pershing himself thinks that.”

    ^‘^Oh, listen to him , . . can’t be more than twenty-
five and he talks like a book by Woodrow Wilson . . .
I’m a son of a bitch and I know it, but when I’m drunk
I say what I goddam please.”
    “I don’t see any good a lot of loud talk’s going to do.
It’s a magnificent tragic show . . . the Paris fog smells of
strawberries . . . the gods don’t love us but we’ll die
young just the same. . . . Who said I was sober?”
    They finished up a bottle. Dick taught Robbins a rhyme
in French:

                Les marionettes font font font
                Trots fetit tows          fuis s^en vont

798
and when the cafe closed they went out arm in arm. Rob*
bins was humming,

               Cheer ufy Nafoleony youHl soon he dead
               A short life and a gay one

and stopping to talk with all the petite femmes they met on
the BouP Mich^ Dick finally left him talking to a cowlike
woman in a flappy hat in front of the fountain on the Place
St. Michel, and began the long walk home to his hotel
that was opposite the Gare St. Lazare.
   The broad asphalt streets were deserted under the pink
arclights but here and there on benches along the quais,
under the bare dripping trees along the bank of the Seme,
in spite of the raw night couples were still sitting huddled
together in the strangleholds of Pamour. At the corner
of the boulevard Sebastopol a whitefaced young man who
was walking the other way looked quickly into his face and
stopped. Dick slackened his pace for a moment, but walked
on past the string of marketcarts rumbling down the rue
de Rivoli, taking deep breaths to clear the reek of whiskey
out of his head. The long brightlylighted avenue that led
to the opera was empty. In front of the opera there were
a few people, a girl with a lovely complexion who was
hanging on the arm of a poilu gave him a long smile.
Almost at his hotel he ran face to face into a girl who
seemed remarkably pretty, before he knew it he was asking
her what she was doing out so late. She laughed, charm-
ingly he thought, and said she was doing the same thing he
was. He took her to a little hotel on the back street behind
his own. They were shown into a chilly room that smelt oj
furniture polish. There was a big bed, a bidet, and a lot ol
heavy claretcolored hangings. The girl was older than he’d
thought and very tired, but she had a beautiful figure
                               he was glad to see how clean her under-
and very pale skin 5
wear was, with a pretty lace edging. They sat a little whip
on the edge of the bed talking low.

                                                                               3^1

799
   When he asked her what her name was^ she shook her
head and smiled, ^^Qu’est-ce que ga vous fait?”
   “L’homme sans nom et la femme sans nom, vont faire
Pamour a Photel du neant,” he said.          qu’il est rigolo,
celui-la,” she giggled. ^^Dis, tu n’est pas malade?” He
shook his head. ^^Moi non plus,” she said, and started rub-
bing up against him like a kitten.
   When they left the hotel they roamed around the dark
streets until they found an earlymorning coffeebar. They
ate coffee and croissants togethei in drowsy intimate quiet,
leaning very close to each other as they stood against the
bar. She left him to go up the hill towards Montmartre.
He asked her if he couldn’t see her again sometime. She
^?hrugged her shoulders. He gave her thirty francs and
kissed her and whispered in her ear a parody of his little
rhyme:

               Les fetites marionettes font font font
                Un f^tit feu amour et fms s^en vont

    She laughed and pinched his cheek and the last he heard
of her was her gruff giggle and ^^Oh qu’il est rigolo,
celui-la.”
    He went back to his room feeling happy and sleepy and
saying to himself: what’s the matter with my life is I
haven’t got a woman of my own. He had just time to wash
and shave and put on a clean shirt and to rush down to
headquarters in order to be there when Colonel Edge-
combe, who was a damnably early riser, got in. He found
orders to leave for Rome that night.
    By the time he got on the train his eyes were stinging
with sleepiness. He and the sergeant who went with him
had a compartment reserved at the end of a first class
coach marked Paris-Brindisi. Outside of their compart-
                                               people were standing in the
 ment the train was packed j
 aisles. Dick had taken off his coat and Sam Browne belt
 and was loosening his puttees, planning to stretch out on

800
one o£ the seats and go to sleep even before the train left,
when he saw a skinny American face in the door of the
compartment.       beg your pardon, is this Ca-ca-captam
Savage?” Dick sat up and nodded yawning. “Captain Sav-
age, my name is Barrow, G. H. Barrow, attached to the
American delegation.  . , , I have to go to Rome tonight
and there^s not a seat on the train. The transport oiSicer in
the station very kindly said that . . . er . . , er although

it wasn’t according to Hoyle you might stretch a pomt and
allow us to ride with you ... I have with me a very
charming young lady member of the Near East Re-
lief . .         “Captain Savage, it certainly is mighty nice of
you to let us ride with you,” came a drawling Texas voice,
and a pinkcheeked girl in a dark grey uniform brushed past
the man who said his name was Barrow and climbed up into
the car. Mr. Barrow, who was shaped like a string bean
and had a prominent twitching Adam’s apple and popeyes,
began tossing up satchels and suitcases. Dick was sore and
began to say stiffly, “I suppose you know that it’s entirely
against my orders .  . .” but he heard his own voice saying

it and suddenly grinned and said, “All right, Sergeant
Wilson and I will probably be shot at sunrise, but go
ahead.” At that moment the train started.
    Dick reluctantly scraped his things together into one
corner and settled down there and immediately closed his
eyes. He was much too sleepy to make the effort of talk-
ing to any damn relievers. The sergeant sat in the other
corner and Mr. Barrow and the girl occupied the other
seat. Through his doze Dick could hear Mr. Barrow’s
voice chugging along, now and then drowned out by the
rattle of the express train. He had a stuttery way of talk-
ing like a badly running motorboat engine. The girl didn’t
say much except, “Oh my,” and “I declare,” now and then.
It was the European situation: President Wilson says   .  .  .
new diplomacy .    .  . new Europe . . . permanent peace
without annexations or indemnities. President Wilson

801
says . .  . new understanding between capital and labor

, . . President Wilson appeals to .      .  industrial democ-
                 plain people all over the world behind the
racy . . .
president. Covenant. League of Nations .      . . Dick was
asleep dreaming of a girl rubbing her breasts against him
purring like a kitten, of a popeyed man making a speech, of
William Jennings Wilson speaking before the Baltimore
conflagration, of industrial democracy in a bathhouse on
the Marne in striped trunks, with a young Texas boy with
pink cheeks who wanted to . .  like a string bean .         . .
with a twitching adamsapple  . .
   He woke up with a nightmarish feeling that somebody
was choking him. The train had stopped. It was stifling

in the compartment. The blue shade was drawn down on
the lamp overhead. He stepped over everybody’s legs and
went out in the passage and opened a window. Cold moun-
tain air cut into his nostrils. The hills were snowy in the
moonlight. Beside the track a French sentry was sleepily
leaning on his rifle. Dick yawned desperately.
   The Near East Relief girl was standing beside him,
looking at him smiling. ^Where are we gettin’ to. Captain
Savage? ... Is this Italy yet?”                guess it’s the Swiss
border . . , we’ll have a long wait, I guess . .       . they take
forever at these borders.”
    “Oh Jimminy,” said the girl, jumping up and down,
“it’s the first time I ever crossed a border.”
    Dick laughed and settled back into his seat again. The
train pulled into a barny lonelylooking station, very dimly
lit, and the civilian passengers started piling out with their
baggage. Dick sent his papers by the sergeant to the mili-
tary inspection and settled back to sleep again.
    He slept soundly and didn’t wake up until the Mont
Cenis. Then it was the Italian frontier. Again cold air,
snowy mountains, everybody getting out into an empty
barn of a station.
    Sleepysentimentally remembering the last time he’d

         364

802
gone into Italy on the Fiat car with Sheldrake, he walked
shivering to the station bar and drank a bottle of mineral
water and a glass of wine. He took a couple of bottles of
mineral water and a fiasco of chianti back to the compart-
ment, and offered Mr. Barrow and the girl drinks when
they came back from the customs and the police looking
very cross and sleepy. The girl said she couldn^t drink
wine because she^d signed a pledge not to drink or smoke
when she joined the N.E.R., but she drank some naineral
water and complained that it tickled her nose. Then they
all huddled back into their corners to try to sleep some
more. By the time they pulled into the Termi station in
Rome they were all calling each other by their first names.
The Texas girPs name was Anne Elizabeth. She and Dick
had spent the day standing in the corridor looking out at
the saffronroofed towns and the peasants’ houses each with
A blue smear on the stucco behind the grapevine over the
door, and the olives and the twisted shapes of the vines in
their redterraced fields, the pale hilly Italian landscape
where the pointed cypresses stood up so dark they were
like gashes in a canvas. She’d told him all about trying to
get overseas all through the war and how her brother
had been killed learning to fly at San Antonio, and how nice
Mr. Barrow had been on the boat and in Pans but that he
would try to make love to her and acted so silly, which
was very inconvenient^ Dick said well maybe it wasn’t so
silly. He could see that Anne Elizabeth felt fine about
travelling to Rome with a real army officer who’d been
to the front and could talk Italian and everything.
    From the station he had to rush to the embassy with
his despatch cases, but he had time to arrange to call up
Miss Trent at the Near East Relief. Barrow too shook
hands with him warmly and said he hoped they’d see
                                          he was anxious to establish con-
something of each other 3
tacts with people who really knew wnat it was all about.
   The only thing Dick thought of that night was to get

                                                                              3^5

803
through and get to bed. Next morning he called up Ed
Schuyler at the Red Cross. They ate a big winey lunch
together at an expensive restaurant near the Pincio gardens.
                                                                 he had an apart-
Ed had been leading the life of Riley j
ment on the Spanish Stairs and took a lot of trips. He’d
gotten fat. But now he was in trouble. The husband of an
Italian woman he’d been running round with was threaten-
ing to challenge him to a duel and he was afraid there’d
be a row and he’d lose his job with the Red Cross. ^^The
war was all right but it’s the peace that really gets you,”
he said. Anyway he was sick of Italy and the Red Cross
and wanted to go home. The only thing was that they were
going to have a revolution in Italy and he’d like to stay and
see it. “Well, Dick, for a member of the grenadine guards
you seem to have done pretty well for yourself.”
    “All a series of accidents,” said Dick, wnnkling up his
nose. “Things are funny, do you know it^” “Don’t I know

it ... I wonder what happened to poor old Steve? Fred
Summers was joining the Polish Legion, last I heard of
him.” “Steve’s probably in jail,” said Dick, “where we
ought to be.” “But it’s not every day you get a chance to
see a show like this.”
    It was four o’clock when they left the restaurant. They
went to Ed’s room and sat drinking cognac in his window
looking out over the yellow and verdigris roofs of the city
and the baroque domes sparkling in the last sunlight, re-
membering how tremendously they’d felt Rome the last
time they’d been there together, talking about what they’d
be doing now that the war was over. Ed Schuyler said he
wanted to get a foreign correspondent job that would take
him out east^ he couldn’t imagine going back home to up-
state New Yorkj he had to see Persia and Afghanistan.
Talking about what he was going to do made Dick feel
 hellishly miserable. He started walking back and forth
 across the tiled floor.
    The bell rang and Schuyler went out in the hall. Dick
         366

804
heard whispering and a woman’s voice talking Italian in a
thin treble. After a moment Ed pushed a little long-
nosed woman with huge black eyes into the room. “This is
Magda,” he said, “Signora Sculpi, meet Captain Savage.”
After that they had to talk in mixed French and Italian.
“I don’t think it’s going to rain,” said Dick. “Suppose I
get hold of a girl for you and we take a drive and eat
supper at Caesar’s palace . . . maybe it won’t be too cold.”
    Dick remembered Anne Elizabeth and called up the
N.E.R. The Texas voice was delighted, said the relieveri
were awful and that she’d made a date with Mr. Barrow
but would get out of it. Yes, she’d be ready if they called
for her in half an hour. After a lot of bargaining between
Signora Sculpi and a cabman they hired a twohorse landau,
considerably elegant and decrepit. Anne Elizabeth was
waiting for them at her door. “Those old hens make me
tired,” she said, jumping into the cab. “Tell him to hurry
or Mr. Barrow’ll catch us. . . . Those old hens say I have
to be in by nine o’clock. I declare it worse’n Sunday-
school in there. ... It was mighty nice of you to ask me
out to meet your friends, Captain Savage. ... I was
just dying to get out and see the town. . . . Isn’t it won-
derful? Say, where does the Pope live?”
    The sun had set and it had begun to get chilly. The
Palazzo dei Cesari was empty and chilly, so they merely
had a vermouth there and went back into town for dinner.
After dinner they went to a show at the Apollo. “My, I’ll
ketch it,” said Anne Elizabeth, “but I don’t care. I want
to see the town.”
    She took Dick’s arm as they went into the theatre. “Do
you know, Dick ... all these foreigners make me feel
kinder lonesome ... I’m glad I got a white man with
me. . . . When I was at school in New York I used to
go out to Jersey to see a textile strike ... I used to be
interested in things like that. I used to feel like I do now
then. But I wouldn’t miss any of it. Maybe it’s the way

                                                                               367

805
you feel when you’re having a really interesting time.^^
Dick felt a little drunk and very affectionate. He squeezed
her arm and leaned over her. ^^Bad mans shan’t hurt liP
Texas girl/’ he crooned.        guess you think I haven’t got
good sense/’ said Anne Elizabeth, suddenly changing her
tone. ^^But oh lawsie, how’m I going to get along with that
Methodist Board of Temperance and Public Morals I’ve
got to live with! I don’t mean I don’t think their work’s
fine . .    . It’s awful to think of poor little children starv-
ing everywhere. . . . We’ve won the war, now it’s up to
us to help patch things up in Europe just like the President
says.” The curtain was going up and all the Italians around
started shushing. Anne Elizabeth subsided. When Dick
tried to get hold of her hand she pulled it away and
flicked his with her fingers. ^^Say, I thought you were
out of highschool,” she said.
    The show wasn’t much, and Anne Elizabeth who
couldn’t understand a word, kept letting her head drop
on Dick’s shoulder and going to sleep. In the intermission
when they all went to the bar for drinks, Anne Elizabeth
dutifully took lemonade. Going upstairs again to their
seats, there was suddenly a scuffle, A little Italian with eye-
glasses and a bald head had run at Ed Schuyler screaming,
^‘Tradilore.” He ran at him so hard that they both lost
their balance and rolled down the redcarpeted steps, the
little Italian punching and kicking and Ed holding him
off at arm’s length as best he could. Dick and Anne Eliza-
beth, W’’ho turned out to be very strong, grabbed the little
Italian, picked him up off the ground and locked his arms
behind him while Signora Sculpi fell on his neck sobbing.
It was the husband.
    Ed meanwhile got to his feet looking very red and
sheepish. By the time the Italian police appeared every-
thing had quieted down and the manager was nervously
brushing the dust off Ed’s uniform. Anne Elizabeth found
the little Italian his eyeglasses, that were badly bent, and

         368

806
he led his wife out, who was sobbing. He looked so funny^
when he stopped m the door with his bent eyeglassei^

trembling on the end of his nose to shake his fist at Ed^

that Dick couldn^t help laughing. Ed was apologizing pro-

fusely to the manager, who seemed to take his side, ex-

plaining to the policemen in their shiny hats that the hus-
band was pazzo. The bell rang and they all went back t<3

their seats. “Why, Anne Elizabeth, you’re a jujutsu ex-^

pert,” Dick whispered, his lips touching her ear. They got

to giggling so they couldn’t pay attention to the show and
had to go out to a cafe.
    “Now I suppose all the wops’ll think I’m a coward if

I don’t challenge the poor little bugger to a duel.” “Sure,

it’ll be cappistols at thirty paces now ... or eggplants at

five yards.” Dick was laughing so hard he was crying. Ed
began to get sore. “It isn’t funny,” he said, “it’s a hell of a
thing to have happen ... a guy never seems to be able to
have any fun without making other people miserable . .      .

poor Magda . . . it’s hellish for her. . .             . Miss Trent,
I hope you’ll excuse this ridiculous exhibition.” Ed got up
and went home.
    “Well, what on earth was that about, Dick?” asked
Anne Elizabeth, when they’d gotten out in the street and
were walking towards the N.E.R. boarding house. “Well,
I suppose Signore husband was jealous on account of Ed’s
running around with Magda ... or else it’s a pretty little
blackmail plot . . . poor Ed seems all cut up about it.”
“People sure do things over here they wouldn’t do at
home ... I declare it’s peculiar.” “Oh, Ed gets in trouble
everywhere. . . . He’s got a special knack.” “I guess it’s
the war and continental standards and everything loosens
up people’s morals. ... 1 never was prissy, but my good-
ness, I was surprised when Mr. Barrow asked me to go to
his hotel the first day we landed  . . I’d only spoken to
 him three or four times before on the boat, ... Now at
 home he wouldn’t have done that, not in a thousand years.”

                                                                                369

807
Dick looked searchmgly into Anne Elizabeth’s face. ‘^In
Rome do as the Romans do,” he said with a funny smirk.
She laughed, looking hard into his eyes as if trying to
guess what he meant. ^^Oh, well, I guess it’s all part of
life,” she said. In the shadow of the doorway he wanted
to do some heavy kissing, but she gave him a quick peck in
the mouth and shook her head. Then she grabbed his hand
and squeezed it hard and said, ^^Let’s us be good friends.”
Dick walked home with his head swimming with the scent
of her sandy hair.
   Dick had three or four days to wait in Rome. The Presi-
dent was to arrive on January 3 and several couriers were
held at his disposition. Meanwhile he had nothing to do
but walk around the town and listen to the bands practicing
The Star-Sfangled Banner and watch the flags and the
stands going up.
    The first of January was a holiday; Dick and Ed and
Mr. Barrow and Anne Elizabeth hired a car and went out
to Hadrian’s Villa and then on to Tivoli for lunch. It
was a showery day and there was a great deal of mud on
the roads. Anne Elizabeth said the rolling Campagna, yel-
low and brown with winter, made her think of back home
along the Middlebuster. They ate fritto misto and drank a
lot of fine gold Frascati wine at the restaurant above the
waterfall. Ed and Mr. Barrow agreed about the Roman
Empire and that the ancients knew the art of life. Anne
Elizabeth seemed to Dick to be flirting with Mr. Barrow,
It made him sore the way she let him move his chair close
to hers when they sat drinking their coffee on the terrace
afterwards, looking down into the deep ravine brimmed
with mist from the waterfall. Dick sat drinking his coffee
without saying anything.
    When she’d emptied her cup Anne Elizabeth jumped
to her feet and said she wanted to go up to the little round
temple that stood on the hillside opposite like something
in an old engraving. Ed said the path was too steep for so

         370

808
soon after lunch. Mr. Barrow said without enthusiasm, er,
heM go. Anne Elizabeth was off running across the bridge
and down the path with Dick running after her slipping
and stumbling in the loose gravel and the puddles. When
they got to the bottom the mist was soppy and cold on
their faces. The waterfall was right over their heads. Their
ears were full of the roar of it. Dick looked back to see if
Mr. Barrow was coming.
    ^^He must have turned back,’^ he shouted above the falls.
“Oh, I hate people who won’t ever go anywhere,” yelled
Anne Elizabeth. She grabbed his hand. “Let’s run up to the
temple.” They got up there breathless. Across the ravine
they could see Ed and Mr. Barrow still sitting on the ter-
race of the restaurant. Anne Elizabeth thumbed her nose
at them and then waved. “Isn’t this wonderful?” she
spluttered. “Oh, I^m wild about ruins and scenery         . . .
rd like to go all over Italy and see everything. . . .
Where can we go this afternoon? . . . Let’s not go back
and listen to them mouthing about the Roman Empire.”
                                                      you know the lake where
    “We might get to Nemi . . .
Caligula had his galleys . .       . but I don’t think we can
get there without the car.” “Then they’d come along.     .  . .
No, let’s take a walk.” “It might rain on us.” “Well, what

if it does? We won’t run.”
    They went up a path over the hills above the town and
soon found themselves walking through wet pastures and
oakwoods with the Campagna stretching lightbrown below
them and the roofs of Tivoli picked out with black cypresses
like exclamation points. It was a showery springfeeling
afternoon. They could see the showers moving in dark
grey and whitish blurs across the Campagna. Underfoot
little redpurple cyclamens were blooming. Anne Elizabeth
kept picking them and poking them in his face for him to
smell. Her -'heeks were red and her hair was untidy and
 she seemed Lo feel too happy to walk, running and skip-
 ping all thr way. A small sprinkle of rain wet them a

                                                                                371

809
                                                                .




little and made the hair streak on her forehead. Then there
was a patch of chilly sunlight. They sat down on the root
of a big beechtree and looked up at the long redbrown
pointed buds that glinted against the sky. Their noses were
full of the smell of the little cyclamens. Dick felt steamy
from the climb and the wet underbrush and the wine he’d
drunk and the smell of the little cyclamens. He turned
and looked in her eyes. ^Well/’ he said. She grabbed him
by the ears and kissed him again and again. ^^Say you love
me,” she kept saying in a strangling voice. He could smell
her sandy hair and warm body and the sweetness of the
little cyclamens. He pulled her to her feet and held her
against his body and kissed her on the mouthy their
tongues touched. He dragged her through a break in the
hedge into the next field. The ground was too wet. Across
the field was a little hut made of brush. They staggered
as they walked with their arms around each other’s waists,
their thighs grinding stiffly together. The hut was full of
dry cornfodder. They lay squirming together among the
dry crackling cornfodder. She lay on her back with her
eyes closed, her lips tightly pursed. He had one hand
under her head and with the other was trying to undo her
              something tore under his hand. She began push-
clothes 5
ing him away. ^‘No, no, Dick, not here .     . . we’ve got to
go back.” ^^Darling girl ... I must               . you’re so won-
derful.” She broke away from him and ran out of the hut.
He sat up on the floor, hating her, brushing the dry shreds
off his uniform.
                                                                             Dick, I’m
    Outside it was raining hard. ^Det’s go back 5
crazy about you but you oughtn’t to have torn my panties

. . . oh, you’re so exasperating.” She began to laugh.
    ^^You oughtn’t to start anything you don’t want to fin-
ish,” said Dick. ^^Oh, I think women are terrible . . . ex-
cept prostitutes . . . there you know what you’re getting.”
   She went up to him and kissed him. ^Toor little boy . .    .
he feels so cross. I’m so sorry . . . I’ll sleep with you,

        372

810
 Dick .    . , I promise I will. You see it’s difficult ... In
 Rome we’ll get a room somewhere.”
     ^^Are you a virgin?” His voice was constrained and stiff.,
     She nodded. “Funny, isn’t it? ... in wartime . . .
 You boys have risked your lives. I guess I can risk that.’^
 “I guess I can borrow Ed’s apartment. I think he’s going to
 Naples tomorrow.” “But you really love me, Dick?” “Of
 course, .  . . it’s only this makes me feel terrible . . .
 making love’s so magnificent.” “I suppose it is . . . Oh, I
wish I was dead.”
     They plodded along down the hill through the down-
 pour that gradually slackened to a cold drizzle. Dick felt
                                     the ram was beginning to get down
 tired out and sodden 3
 his neck. Anne Elizabeth had dropped her bunch of
cyclamens.
    When they got back the restaurant keeper said that the
others had gone to the Villa d’Este, but would come back
soon. They drank hot rum and water and tried to dry
themselves over a brazier of charcoal in the kitchen.
“We’re a fine pair of drowned rats,” tittered Anne Eliza-
beth. Dick growled, “A pair of precious idiots.”
    By the time the others came back they were warm but
still wet. It was a relief to argue with Barrow who was
saying that if the ruling classes of today knew as much
about the art of life as those old Italians he wouldn^t be
a socialist. “I didn’t think you were a socialist any more,”
                                                                         look how the
broke in Anne Elizabeth. “I’m sure I’m not 3
German socialists have acted in the war and now they
try to crybaby and say they wanted peace all along.”
    “It’s possible ... to rec ... to reconcile being a so-
cialist with faith in our President and ... er ... in
democracy,” stammered Barrow, going close to her. ^We’ll
have to have a long talk about that, Anne Elizabeth.”
    Dick noticed how his eyes goggled when he looked af
her. I guess he’s out after her, he said to himself. Wheii
they got into the car he didn’t care whether Barrow sat

                                                                              373

811
next to her or not. They drove all the way back to Rome
in the rain.
    The next three days were very busy with President Wil-
son’s visit to Rome. Dick got cards to various official
functions, heard a great many speeches in Italian and
French and English, saw a great many silk hats and decora-
tions and saluted a great deal and got a pain in the back
from holding a stiff military posture. In the Roman Forum
he was near enough the President’s party to hear the short
man with black mustaches who was pointing out the ruins
of the temple of Romulus, say in stiff English, “Every-
thing here bears relation to the events of the great war.”
There was a hush as the people in the outer groups of
dignitaries strained their ears to hear what Mr. Wilson
would say.
    “That is true,” replied Mr. Wilson in a measured voice.
“And we must not look upon these ruins as mere stones,
but as immortal symbols.” A little appreciative murmur
came from the group. The Italian spoke a little louder next
time. All the silk hats cocked at an angle as the dignitaries
waited for the Italian’s reply. “In America,” he said with
a little bow, “you have something greater, and it is hidden
in your hearts.”
    Mr. Wilson’s silk hat stood up very straight against all
the timeeaten columns and the endless courses of dressed
stone. “Yes,” replied Mr. Wilson, “it is the greatest pride
of Americans to have demonstrated the immense love of
humanity which they bear in their hearts.’^ As the Presi-
dent spoke Dick caught sight of his face past the cocks-
feathers of some Italian generals. It was a grey stony cold
face grooved like the columns, very long under the silk
hat. The little smile around the mTouth looked as if it had
been painted on afterwards. The group moved on and
passed out of earshot.
    That evening at five, when he met Anne Elizabeth
at Ed’s apartment he had to tell her all about tlie official

         374

812
receptions. He said all heM seen had been a gold replies

of the wolf suckling Romulus and Remus up at the Capito]
when the President had been made a Roman citizen, and

his face in the forum.           terrifying face, I swear ifs a

reptile^s face, not warmblooded, or else the face on one of
those old Roman politicians on a tomb on the Via Appia.

.  .  . Do you know what we are, Anne Elizabeth? we’re
                                                                        he burst out
the Romans of the Twentieth Century” j
laughing, ^^and I always wanted to be a Greek.”
   Anne Elizabeth who was a great admirer of Wilson was
annoyed at first by what he was saying. He was nervous
and excited and went on talking and talking. For this once
she broke her pledge and drank some hot rum with him,
as the room was ternbly chilly. In the light of the street
lamps on the little corner of the Spanish Stairs they could
see from Ed’s window, they could see the jumbled dark-
ness of crowds continually passing and repassing. “By God,
Anne Elizabeth, it’s terrible to think about it. ... You
don’t know the way people feel, people praying for him in
peasants’ huts . . . oh, we don’t know anything and we’re
grinding them all underfoot. . . . It’s the sack of Corinth

. . . they think he’s going to give them peace, give them
back the cosy beforethewar world. It makes you sick to
hear all the speeches. .   . . Oh, Christ, let’s stay human
as long as we can . . . not get reptile’s eyes and stone
faces and ink in* our veins instead of blood. . . . I’m
damned if I’ll be a Roman.”
    “I know what you mean,” said Anne Elizabeth, rufiling
up his hair. “You’re an artist, Dick, and J love you very
                   you’re my poet, Dick.”
much . . .
    “To hell with them all,” said Dick, throwing his arms
around her.
    In spite of the hot rum, Dick was very nervous when
he took his clothes off. She was trembling when he came
to her on the bed. It was all right, but she bled a good deal
and they didn’t have a very good time. At supper after-

                                                                               375

813
wards they couldn’t seem to find anything to say to each
other. She went home early and Dick wandered deso-

lately around the streets among the excited crowds and
the flags and the illuminations and the uniforms. The Corso
                     Dick went into a cafe and was greeted by a
was packed 5
group of Italian officers who insisted on setting him up to
drinks. One young fellow with an olive skin and very long
black eyelashes, whose name was Carlo Hugobuonl, became
his special friend and entertainer and took him around to

ail the tables introducing him as II capitan Salvaggio
Ricardo. It was all asti spumante and Ewiva gli ameri-
cam and Italia irridenta and Meester Veelson who had
saved civilta and ewiva la pace, and they ended by taking
Dick to see the belle ragazze. To his great relief all the
girls were busy at the house where they took him and Dick
was able to shp away and go back to the hotel to bed.
    The next morning when he came down to drink his
coffee there was Carlo waiting for him in the hotel lobby.
                                         he hadn’t been able to find a
Carlo was very sleepy j
raggaza until five in the morning but now he was at the
orders of his caro amico to show him round the town. All
day Dick had him with him, in spite of his efforts to get rid
of him without hurting his feelings. He waited while Dick
went to get his orders from the military mission, had lunch

                                              it was all Ed could do to get
with him and Ed Schuyler 5
him away so that Dick could go to Ed’s apartment to meet
Anne Elizabeth. Ed was very funny about it, said that, as
he’d lost Magda, he wouldn’t be able to do anything worth-
while there himself and was glad to have Dick using the
room for venereal purposes. Then he linked his arm firmly
in Carlo’s and carried him off to a cafe.
    Dick and Anne Elizabeth were very tender and quiet.
It was their last afternoon together. Dick was leaving for
Paris that night, and Anne Elizabeth expected to be sent
to Constantinople any day. Dick promised he’d get himself
out to see her there. That night Anne Elizabeth went with

         376

814
him to the station. There they found Carlo waiting with
a huge salami wrapped in silver paper and a bottle of

chianti. The fellow that was going with him had brought
the despatch cases, so there was nothing for Dick to do but
get on the train. He couldn^t seem to think of anything
to say and it was a relief when the train pulled out.
    As soon as he reported to Colonel Edgecombe he was
sent oiff again to Warsaw. Through Germany all the trains
were late and people looked deathly pale and everybody
talked of a bolshevik uprising. Dick was walking up and
down the snowy platform, stamping to keep his feet warm,
during an endless wait at a station in East Prussia, when he
ran into Fred Summers. Fred was a guard on a Red Cross
supply car and invited Dick to ride with him a couple of
stations. Dick fetched his despatches and went along. Fred
had the caboose fitted with an oilstove and a cot and a
great store of wine, cognac and Baker’s chocolate. They
rode all day together talking as the train joggled slowly
across an endless grey frozen plain. ^Tt’s not a peace,”
said Fred Summers, ^ht’s a cockeyed massacre^ Christ, you
ought to see the pogroms.” Dick laughed and laughed.
^^Jeerusalem, it makes me feel good to hear you, you old
bum, Fred.   ,  .  . It’s like the old days of the grenadine
guards.”

    -^Jez, that was a circus,” said Fred. “Out here it’s too
damn hellish to be funny . , . everybody starved and
crazy.”
    “You were damn sensible not to get to be an officer . . .
you have to be so damn careful about everything you say
and do you can’t have any kind of good time.”
    “Jez, you’re the last man I’d ever have expected to
turn out a captain.”
    “C’est la guerre,” said Dick.
    They drank and talked and talked and drank so much
that Dick could barely get back to his compartment with
his despatch case. When they got into the Warsaw station

                                                                               377

815
Fred came running up with a package of chocolate bars.
^^Here’s a little relief, Dick,” he said. “It^s a fine for
coucher avec. Ain’t a woman in Warsaw won’t coucher
for all night for a chocolate bar.”
    When he got back to Paris, Dick and Colonel Edge-
combe went to tea at Miss Stoddard’s. Her drawingroom
was tall and stately with Italian panels on the walls and
yellow and orange damask hangings; through the heavy
lace in the windows you could see the purple branches of
the trees along the quai, the jade Seine and the tall stone
lace of the apse of Notre Dame. ^^What a magnificent set-
ting you have arranged for yourself, Miss Stoddard,”
said Colonel Edgecombe, ^^and if you excuse the compli-
ment, the gem is worthy of its setting.” ^^They were fine
old rooms,” said Miss Stoddard, ^‘^all you need do with
these old houses is to give them a chance.” She turned
to Dick* Young man, what did you do to Robbins that
night we all had supper together^ He talks about nothing
else but what a bright fellow you are.” Dick blushed. ^^We
had a glass of uncommonly good scotch together after-
wards ... It must have been that.” ^Well, I’ll have to
keep my eye on you ... I don’t trust these bright young
men.”
    They drank tea sitting around an ancient wroughtiron
stove. A fat major and a lanternjawed Standard Oil man
named Rasmussen came in, and later a Miss Hutchins who
looked very slender and welltailored in her Red Cross
uniform. They talked about Chartres and about the devas-
tated regions and the popular enthusiasm that was greet-
ing Mr. Wilson everywhere and why Clemenceau always
wore grey lisle gloves. Miss Hutchins said it was because
he really had claws instead of hands and that was why
they called him the tiger.
    Miss Stoddard got Dick in the window:          hear you’ve
just come from Rome, Captain Savage . . . I’ve been in
Rome a great deal since the war began . . . Tell me what

         378

816
you saw . . . tell me about everything ... I like It bet*'
ter than anywhere.’^ “Do you like Tivoli^” “Yes, I sup-
pose so^ it^s rather a tourist place, though, don’t you
think Dick told her the story of the fight at the Apollo
without mentioning Ed’s name, and she was very much
amused. They got along very well In the window watch-
ing the streetlamps come into greenish bloom along the
river as they talked, Dick was wondering how old she
was, la femme de trente ans.
   As he and the Colonel were leaving they met Mr*
Moorehouse in the hall. He shook hands warmly with
Dick, said he was so glad to see him again and asked him
to come by late some afternoon, his quarters were at the
Crillon and there were often some interesting people
there. Dick was curiously elated by the tea, although he’d
expected to be bored. He began to think it was about
time he got out of the service, and, on the way back to
the office, where they had some work to clean up, asked
the Colonel what steps he ought to take to get out of the
service In France. He thought he might get a position of
some kind in Pans. “Well, if you’re looking for that, this
fellow Moorehouse Is the man for you ... I believe he’s
to be In charge of some sort of publicity work for Standard
Oil   . . . Can you see yourself as a public relations coun-
sel, Savage?” The Colonel laughed. “Well, I’ve got my
mother to think of,” said Dick seriously.
    At the office Dick found two letters. One was from Mr.
Wigglesworth saying that Blake had died of tuberculosis
at Saranac the week before, and the other was from Anne
Elizabeth:

Darling:
    I’m working at a desk in this miserable dump that’?
nothing but a collection of old cats that make me tired.
Darling, I love you so much. We must see each other
soon. I wonder what Dad and Buster would say if i

                                                                               379

817
brought a goodlooking husband home from overseas.
They’d be hopping mad at first but I reckon they’d get
over it. Gol darn it, I don’t want to work at a desk, I want
to travel around Europe and see the sights. The only
thing I like here is a little bunch of cyclamens on my
desk. Do you remember the cute little pink cyclamens?
I’ve got a bad cold and I’m lonely as the dickens. This
Methodist Board of Temperance and Public Morals are
the meanest people I’ve ever seen. Ever been homesick,
Dick? I don’t believe you ever have. Do get yourself sent
right back to Rome. I wish I hadn’t been such a prissy

silly little girl up there where the cyclamens bloomed. It’s
hard to be a woman, Dick. Do anything you like but don’t
forget me. I love you so.
                                                           Anne Elizabeth.

    When Dick got back to his hotel room with the two
letters in the inside pocket of his tunic he threw himself
down on the bed and lay a long time staring at the ceil-
ing. A little before midnight Henry knocked on the door.
He was just in from Brussels. “Why, what’s the matter,
Dick, you look all grey ... are you sick or something?”
    Dick got to his feet and washed his face at the wash-
basin. “Nothing the matter,” he spluttered through the
water. “I’m fed up with this man’s army, I guess.”
    “You look like you’d been crying.”
    “Crying over spilt milk,” said Dick, and cleared his
throat with a little laugh.
    “Say, Dick, I’m in trouble, you’ve got to help me
out. ... You remember that girl Olga, the one who
threw the teapot at me?” Dick nodded. “Well, she says
she’s going to have a baby and that I’m the proud
parent. . .   . It’s ridiculous.”
    ^Well, things like that happen,” said Dick sourly.
    “No, but Christ, man, I don’t want to marry the bitch

e . . or support the offspring . . . it’s too silly. Even if

         380

818
she is going to have a baby it’s probably not mine . . 

She says she’ll write to General Pershing. Some of those
poor devils of enlisted men they sent up for twenty years
for rape .   . . it’s the same story.”
    ^^They shot a couple. . . . Thank God I wasn’t on that
courtmartial.”
    ^^But think of how it ud upset mother.   . . . Look here,
you can parleyvoo better’n I can ... I want you to come
and talk to her.”
    ^^All right  . . . but I’m dead tired and feel lousy . .
Dick put on his tunic. ^^Say, Henry, how are you off for
jack? The franc’s dropping all the time. We might be
able to give her a little money, and we’ll be going home
soon, we’ll be too far away for blackmail.” Henry looked
low. ^Tt’s a hell of a thing to have to admit to your kid
brother,” he said, “but I played poker the other night and
got cleaned out . .    . I’m S.O.L. all down the line.”
    They went around to the place on Montmartre where
Olga was hatcheck girl. There was nobody there yet,
so she was able to come out and have a drink with them
at the bar. Dick rather liked her. She was a bleached blonde
with a small, hard, impudent face and big brown eyes*
Dick talked her around, saying that his brother couldn’t
marry a foreigner on account of la famille and not having
a situation and that he would soon be out of the army and
back at a drafting desk .     . . did she know how little a
draftsman in an architect’s office was paid en Amerique?
Nothing at all, and with la vie chere and la chute du franc
and le dollar would go next maybe and la revolution
mondiale would be coming on, and the best thing she
could do was to be a good little girl and not have the baby*
She began to cry . . . she so granted to get married and
have children and as for an avortment . . . mais non,
puis non. She stamped her foot and went back to her hat-
check booth. Dick followed her and consoled her and pat-
ted her cheek and said que voulez vous it was la vie and

                                                                               38x

819
wouldn’t she consider a present of hve hundred francs^
She shook her head but when he mentioned a thousand
she began to brighten up and to admit that que voulez
vous it was la vie. Dick left her and Henry cheerfully
making a date to go home together after the boite closed.
^Wellj I had a couple of hundred bucks saved up, I guess

it’ll have to go . . . try to hold her off until we can get
a good exchange . .    . and Henry, the next time you
play poker, for goodness’ sake watch yourself.”
   The day before the first plenary session of the Peace
Conference Dick was running into the Crillon to go up
to see Mr. Moorehouse who had promised to get cards
for him and Colonel Edgecombe, when he saw a familiar
face in a French uniform. It was Ripley, just discharged
from the French artillery school at Fontainebleau. He said
he was in there trying to find an old friend of his father’s
to see if he could get a job connected with the peace dele-
gations. He was broke and Marianne the Third Republic
wasn’t keeping him any more unless he enlisted in the
foreign legion and that was the last thing he wanted to do.
After Dick had phoned Major Edgecombe that Mr.
Moorehouse had been unable to get them cards and that
they must try again through military channels they went
md had a drink together at the Ritz bar.
    ^^Big time stuff,” said Ripley, looking around at the
decorations on the uniforms and the jewels on the women,
            are you goin^ to keef ^em down on the farm . . .
After they^ve seen Paree?^^ Dick grunted. “I wish to hell
I knew what I was going to do after I got out of this
man’s army.” ^^Ask me something easy .    . . oh, I guess
1 can get a job somewhere ... if the worst comes to the
worst I’ll have to go back and finish Columbia ... I
 wish the revolution ud come. I don’t want to go back to
the States . . . hell, I dunno what I want to do.” This
'kind of talk made Dick feel uneasy; ^^Mefiez vous,” he
         38a

820
quoted. ^^Les oreilles enemies vous ecoutent.” ^^And that^s
not the half of it.”
    “Say, have you heard anything from Steve Warner
Dick asked in a low voice. “I got a letter from Boston    .  . .

I think he got a year’s sentence for refusing to register

. . . He’s lucky ... A lot of those poor devils got
twenty years.” “Well, that comes of monkeying with the
buzzsaw,” said Dick outloud. Ripley looked at him hard
                                                       then they went on talk-
with narrowed eyes for a second j
ing about other things.
    That afternoon Dick took Miss Stoddard to tea at Rum-
pelmeyers, and afterwards walked up to the Crillon with
her to call on Mr. Moorehouse. The corridors of the Cril-
lon were lively as an anthill with scuttling khaki uni-
forms, marine yeomen, messenger boys, civilians^ a gust
of typewriter clicking came out from every open door. At
every landing groups of civilian experts stood talking in
low voices, exchanging glances with passersby, scribbling
notes on scratchpads. Miss Stoddard grabbed Dick’s arm
with her sharp white fingers. “Listen ... it’s like a dy-
namo . .    . what do you think it means?” “Not peace,”
said Dick.
    In the vestibule of Mr. Moorehouse’s suite, she intro-
duced him to Miss Williams, the tiredlooking sharpfaced^
blonde who was his secretary. “She’s a treasure,” Miss
Stoddard whispered as they went through into the draw-
ingroom, “does more work than anybody in the whole
place.”
    There were a great many people standing around in the
blue light that filtered in through the long windows. A
waiter was making his way among the groups with a tray
of glasses and a valetlooking person was tiptoeing around
with a bottle of port. Some people had teacups and others
had glasses in their hands but nobody was paying much
attention to them. Dick noticed at once from the way Miss
Stoddard walked into the room and the way Mr. Moore-^

                                                                                383

821
house came forward a little to meet her, that she was used

to running the show in that room. He was introduced to

various people and stood around for a while with his
mouth shut and his ears open. Mr. Moorehouse spoke to
him and remembered his name, but at that moment a mes-
sage came that Colonel House was on the phone and Dick
had no further chance to talk to him. As he was leaving
Miss Williams, the secretary, said: “Captain Savage, ex-
cuse me a moment . . . You’re a friend of Mr. Robbins’,

aren’t you?” Dick smiled at her and said, “Well, rather
an acquaintance, I’d say. He seems a very interesting fel-

low.” “He’s a very brilliant man,” said Miss Williams,
“but I’m afraid he’s losing his grip ... as I look at il

it’s very demoralizing over here . . . for a man. HoW
^n anybody expect to get through their work in a place
where they take three hours for lunch and sit around
drinking in those miserable cafes the rest of the time?”
    “You don’t like Paris, Miss Williams.”
    “I should say not.”
   “Robbins does,” said Dick maliciously. “Too well,”
said Miss Williams. “I thought if you were a friend of

his you might help us straighten him out. We’ie very wor-
ried over him. He hasn’t been here for two days at a most
important time, very important contacts to be made. J.W.’s
working himself to the bone. I’m so afraid he’ll break
'down under the strain . . . And you can’t get a reliable
stenographer or an extra typewriter ... I have to do all
the typing beside my secretarial duties.” “Oh, it’s a busy
time for all of us,” said Dick. “Goodby, Miss Williams.”
She gave him a smile as he left.
    In late February he came back from a long dismal run
to Vienna to find another letter from Anne Elizabeth:

Dick Darling:
    Thanks for the fine postcards. I’m still at this desk job
and so lonely. Try to come to Rome if you can, Some-

         384

822
thing is happening that is going to make a great change m
our lives. Pm terribly worried about it but I have every
confidence in you. I know you^re straight, Dicky boy«
Oh, Pve got to see you. If you don’t come in a day oi
two I may throw up everything and come to Paris
Your girl,
                                                            Anke Elizabeth.

    Dick went cold all over when he read the letter in th<j
Brasserie Weber where he’d gone to have a beer with an
artillery 2nd lieutenant named Staunton Wills who was
studying at the Sorbonne. Then he read a letter from his
mother complaining about her lonely old age and one
from Mr. Cooper offering him a job. Wills was talking
about a girl he’d seen at the Theatre Caumartin he wanted
to get to know, and was asking Dick in his capacity of an
expert in these matters, how he ought to go about it. Dick
tried to keep talking about how he could certainly get to
see her by sending her a note through the ouvreuse, tried
to keep looking at the people with umbrellas passing up
and down the rue Royale and the wet taxis and shiny
                                                                 she was going to
staffcars, but his mind was in a panic 5
have a babyj she expected him to marry her; I’m damned
if I will. After they’d had their beer, he and Wills went
walking down the left bank of the Seine, looking at old
books and engravings in the secondhand bookstalls and
ended up having tea with Eleanor Stoddard.
    ^^Why are you looking so doleful, Richard?” asked
Eleanor. They had gone into the window with their tea-^
cups. At the table Wills was sitting talking with Eveline
Hutchins and a newspaper man. Dick took a gulp of tea,
^^Talking to you’s a great pleasure to me, Eleanor,” he
said.
   ^^Well, then it’s not that that’s making you pull such a
long face?”
    ^^You know . . . some .days you feel as if you were

                                                                              385

823
stagnating ... I guess I’m tired of wearing a uniform
... I want to be a private individual for a change.”
   “You don’t want to go home, do you?*”
   “Oh, no, I’ve got to go, I guess, to do something about
mother, that is if Henry doesn’t go      .  . . Colonel Edge-
combe says he can get me released from the service over
here, that is, if I waive my right to transportation home.
God knows I’m willing to do that.”
   “Why don’t you stay over here ... We might get
J.W. to fix up something for you . . . How would you
like to be one of his bright young men?”
   “It ud be better than ward politics in Joisey .          .  . Pd
like to get a job that sent me traveling       . . . It’s ridicu-
lous because I spend my life on the train in this service,
but I’m not fed up with it yet.”
   She patted the back of his hand: “That’s what I like
about you, Richard, the appetite you have for everything

, . . J.W. spoke several times about that keen look you
have .  .  . he’s like that, he’s never lost his appetite, that’s
why he’s getting to be a power in the world .           ,  . you
know Colonel House consults him all the time ... You
see, I’ve lost my appetite.” They went back to the tea-
table.
    Next day orders came around to send a man to Romej
Dick jumped at the job. When he heard Anne Elizabeth’s
voice over the phone, chilly panic went through him again,
but he made his voice as agreeable as he could. “Oh, you
were a darling to come, Dicky boy,” she was saying. He
met her at a cafe at the corner of the Piazza Venezia. It
made him feel embarrassed the uncontrolled way she ran
up to him and threw her arms around his neck and kissed
him. “It’s all right,” she said laughing, “they’ll just
think we’re a couple of crazy Americans .      . . Oh, Dick,
 lemme look at you . . . Oh, Dickyboy, I’ve been so lone-
some for you.”
    Dick’s throat was tight. “We can have supper together,

         386

824
ran’t we?” he managed to say.         thought we might get
hold of Ed Schuyler.”
    She’d picked out a small hotel on a back street for them
to go to. Dick let himself be carried away by her3 after

all, she was quite pretty today with her cheeks so flushed
and the smell of her hair made him think of the smell of
                                                                            but all the
the little cyclamens on the hill above Tivoli j
time he was making love to her, sweating and straining
in her arms, wheels were going round in his head: what
can I do, can I do, can I do?
    They were so late getting to Ed’s place that he had
given them up. He was all packed up to leave Rome for
Paris and home the next day. ^^That’s fine,” said Dick;
^^we’ll go on the same tram.” ^^This is my last night in
Rome, ladies and gentlemen,” said Ed, ^flet’s go and have
a hangup supper and to hell with the Red Cross.”
    They ate an elaborate supper with first class wines, at
a place in front of Trajan’s column, but Dick couldn’t taste
anything. His own voice sounded tinnily in his ears. He
could see that Ed was making mighty efforts to cheer
things up, ordering fresh bottles, kidding the waiter, tell-
ing funny stories about his misadventures with Roman
ladies. Anne Elizabeth drank a lot of wine, said that the
 N.E.R. dragons weren’t as bad as she had painted them,
that they’d given her a latchkey when she’d told them her
fiance was in Rome for just that evening. She kept nudg-
ing Dick’s knee with hers under the table and wanting
 them to sing Auld Lmg Syne. After dinner they rode
 around in a cab and stopped to drop coins in the Trevi
 fountain. They ended up at Ed’s place sitting on packing
 boxes, finishing up a bottle of champagne Ed suddenly
 remembered and singing Aufres de mcu blonde.
     All the time Dick felt sober and cold inside. It was a
 relief when Ed announced drunkenly that he was going
 to visit some lovely Roman ladies of his acquaintance foi
 the last time and leave his flat to I promessi sposi for th«

                                                                                387

825
flight. After he’d gone Anne Elizabeth threw her arms
around Dick: ^^Give me one kiss, Dickyboy, and then you
must take me back to the Methodist Board of Temperance
and Public Morals . . . after all, it’s private morals that
count. Oh, I love our private morals.” Dick kissed her,
then he went and looked out of the window. It had started

to rain again. Frail ribbons of light from a streetlamp shot
along the stone treads of the corner of the Spanish Stairs
he could see between the houses. She came and rested her
head on his shoulder;
    'What you tinking about, Dickyboy?”
    "Look, Anne Elizabeth, I’ve been wanting to talk about

it ... do you really think that .            .  . ?”

    "It’s more than two months now ... It couldn’t be
anything else, and I have a little morning sickness now
and then. I’d been feeling terrible today, only I declare
seeing you’s made me forget all about it.”
    "But you must realize ... It worries me terribly.
There must be something you can do about it.”
    "I tried castor oil and quinine . .         . that’s all I know

, , . you see I’m just a simple country girl.”
                                              you’ve got to do something.
    "Oh, do be serious . . .
There are plenty of doctors would attend to it ... I can
raise the money somehow . .     . It’s hellish, I’ve got to
go back tomorrow ... I wish I was out of this goddam
uniform.”
    "But I declare I think I’d kinda like a husband and a
baby ... if you were the husband and the baby was
yours.”
    "I can’t do it ... I couldn’t afford it . . . They
won’t let you get married in the army.”
    "That’s not so, Dick,” she said slowly.
    They stood a long time side by side without looking at
each other, looking at the rain over the dark roofs and
the faint phosphorescent streaks of the streets. She spoke
         388

826
in a trembly frail voice, ‘^You mean you don’t love me
anymore.”
    ^^Of course I do, I don’t know what love is ... I
suppose I love any lovely girl . . . and especially you,
sweetheart.” Dick heard his own voice, like somebody
else’s voice in his ears. ^We’ve had some fine times to-
gether.” She was kissing him all around his neck above
the stiff collar of the tunic. ‘^But, darlings can’t you un-
derstand I can’t support a child until I have some definite
                                                                            Henry’s so
career, and I’ve got my mother to support j
irresponsible I can’t expect anything from him. But I’ve

                                        it’s getting late.”
got to take you home 5
    When they got down into the street the rain had let up
again. All the waterspouts were gurgling and water
glinted in the gutters under the street lamps. She sud-
denly slapped him, shouted you’re it, and ran down the
street. He had to chase her, swearing under his breath.
He lost her in a small square and was getting ready to
give her up and go home when she jumped out at him
from behind a stone phoenix on the edge of a fountain.
He grabbed her by the arm, ^^Don’t be so damn kitten-
ish/’ he said nastily. ^^Can’t you see I’m worried sick.’*"
She began to cry.
    When they got to her door she suddenly turned to him
and said seriously, “Look, Dick, maybe we’ll put off the
baby .  . . I’ll try horseback riding. Everybody says that
w^orks. I’ll write you  . . honestly. I wouldn’t hamper
your career in any way * . . and I know you ought to
have time for your poetry . . , You’ve got a big future,
boy, I know it ... if we got married I’d work too.”
    “Anne Elizabeth, you’re a wonderful girl, maybe if we
didn’t have the baby we might wangle it somehow.” He
took her by the shoulders and kissed her on the forehead.
Suddenly she started jumping up and down, chanting
like a child, “Goody, goody, goody, we’re going to get
married.”

                                                                               389

827
             3o be serious, kid.”
    ^*^1 am . . . unto death,” she said slowly. ^^Look, don^t
come to see me tomorrow ... I have a lot of supplies

to check up. PH write you to Paris.”
   Back at the hotel it gave him a curious feeling putting
on his pyjamas and getting alone into the bed where he
and Anne Elizabeth had been together that afternoon.
There were bedbugs and the room smelt and he spent a
miserable night.
   All the way down to Paris on the train, Ed kept mak-
ing him drink and talking about the revolution, saying
he had it on good authority the syndicates were going to
seize the factories in Italy the first of May. Hungary had
gone red and Bavaria, next it would be Austria, then
Italy, then Prussia and France^ the American troops sent
against the Russians in Archangel had mutinied. ^TPs the
world revolution, a goddam swell time to be alive, and
wedl be goddam lucky if we come out of it with whole
skins.”
    Dick said grumpily that he didn’t think soj the Allies
had things well in hand. “But, Dick, I thought you were
all for the revolution, it’s the only possible way to end
this cockeyed war.” “The war’s over now and all these
revolutions are just the war turned inside out ... You
 can’t stop war by shooting all your opponents. That’s just
more war.” They got sore and argued savagely. Dick was
glad they were alone in the compartment. “But I thought
you were a royalist, Ed.” “I was , . . but since seeing
 the King of Italy I’ve changed my mind ... I guess
 I’m for a dictator, the man on the white horse.”
     They settled to sleep on either side of the compartment,
 sore and drunk. In the morning they staggered out with
 headaches into the crisp air of a frontier station and drank
 steaming hot chocolate a freshfaced Frenchwoman poured
 out for them into big white cups. Everything was frosty.
 The sun was rising bright vermilion. Ed Schuyler talked

          390

828
about la belle, la douce France* and they began to get

along better. By the time they reached the banlieue, they
were talking about going to see Spinelli in Plus Ca Change

that night.
    After the ofHce and details to attend to and the necessity

of appearing stiff and military before the sergeants it was

a relief to walk down the left bank of the Seine, where

the buds were bursting pink and palest green on the trees,

and the bouquinistes were closing up their stalls in the

deepening lavender twilight, to the quai de la Tournelle
where everything looked like two centuries ago, and to

walk slowly up the chilly stone stairs to Eleanor’s and to

find her sitting behind the teatable in an ivorycolored

dress with big pearls around her neck pouring tea and re-

tailing, in her malicious gentle voice, all the latest gossip

of the Crillon and the Peace Conference. It gave Dick a

funny feeling when she said as he was leaving that they

wouldn’t see each other for a couple of weeks as she was

going to Rome to do some work at the Red Cross office

there. “What a shame we couldn’t have been there at the
same time,” said Dick. “I’d have liked that too,” she said.
“A revederci, Richard.”
    March was a miserable month for Dick. He didn’t seem

to have any friends any more and he was sick to death of

everybody around the despatch service. When he was

off duty his hotel room was so cold that he’d have to go

out to a cafe to read. His missed Eleanor and going to

her cosy apartment in the afternoon. He kept getting wor-
                                                            he couldn’t make out
rying letters from Anne Elizabeth 5
from them what had happened^ she made mysterious ref-

 erences to having met a charming friend of his at the Red
 Cross who had meant so much. Then too he was broke be-

cause he kept having to lend Henry money to buy off

 Olga with.
     Early in April he got back from one of his everlasting

 trips to Coblenz and found a pneumatique from Eleanor

                                                                                391

829
for him at his hotel. She was inviting him to go on a picnic
to Chantilly with her and J.W. the next Sunday.
    They left at eleven from the Crillon in J.W.’s new
Fiat. There was Eleanor in her grey tailored suit and a
stately lady of a certain age named Mrs. Wilberforce, the
wife of a vicepresident of Standard Oil, and longfaced
Mr. Rasmussen. It was a fine day and everybody felt the
spring in the air. At Chantilly they went through the
chateau and fed the big carp in the moat. They ate their
lunch in the woods, sitting on rubber cushions. J.W. kept
everybody laughing explaining how he hated picnics, ask-
ing everybody what it was that got into even the most
intelligent women that they were always trying to make
people go on picnics. After lunch they drove to Senlis
to see the houses that the Uhlans had destroyed there
in the battle of the Marne. Walking through the garden
of the ruined chateau, Eleanor and Dick dropped behind
the others. ^^You don^t know anything about when theyYe
going to sign peace, do you, Eleanor?” asked Dick.
    “Why, it doesn’t look now as if anybody would ever
                                                                    have you seen
sign . . , certainly the Italians won’t j
what d’Annunzio said?”
    “Because the day after peace is signed I take off Uncle
Sam’s liver}^ . . . The only time in my life time has ever
dragged on my hands has been since I’ve been in the
army.”
    “I got to meet a friend of yours in Rome,” said Eleanor,
looking at him sideways. Dick felt chilly all over. “Who
was that?” he asked. It was an effort to keep his voice
steady. “That little Texas girl . . . she’s a cute little
thing. She said you were engaged!” Eleanor’s voice was
cool and probing like a dentist’s tool.
    “She exaggerated a little,” he gave a little dry laugh,
“as Mark Twain said when they reported his death.” Dick
felt that he was blushing furiously.
    “I hope so ... You see, Richard . . . I’m old

         392

830
enough to be, well at least your maiden aunt. She’s a
cute little thing . . . but you oughtn’t to marry just yet,
of course it’s none of my business * *  an unsuitable mar-*
riage has been the ruination of many a promising young
fellow ... I shouldn’t say this.”
    ^^But I like your taking an interest like that, honestly

it means a great deal to me ... I understand all about
marry in haste and repent at leisure. In fact Pm not very
much interested in marriage anyway .          .  . but ... I
don’t know .    . . Oh, the whole thing is very difficult.”
    ^^Never do anything difficult . . . It’s never worth it,”

said Eleanor severely. Dick didn’t say anything. She quick-*
ened her step to catch up with the others. Walking beside
her he caught sight of her coldly chiselled profile jiggling
a httle from the jolt of her high heels on the cobbles..
Suddenly she turned to him laughing, ^^Now I won’t
scold you any more, Richard, ever again.”
    A shower was coming up. They’d hardly got back into
the car before it started to rain. Going home the gimcrack
Paris suburbs looked grey and gloomy in the rain. When
they parted in the lobby of the Crillon J.W. let Dick
understand that there would be a job for him in his office
as soon as he was out of the service. Dick went home and
wrote his mother about it in high spirits:


    . . . It’s not that everything isn’t intensely interesting
here in Paris or that I haven’t gotten to know people quite
dose to what’s really going on, but wearing a uniform and
always having to worry about army regulations and salut-
ing and everything like that, seems to keep my mind from
working. Inside I’ll be in the doldrums until I get a suit
of civvies on again. I’ve been promised a position in
                                                                      he’s a dollar a
Ward Moorehouse’s office here in Paris j
year expert, but as soon as peace is signed he expects to
start his business up again. He’s an adviser on public rela-
tions and publidty to big corporations like Standard Oil

                                                                               393

831
It’s the type of work that will allow me to continue
my real work on the side. Everybody tells me it^s the
opportunity of a lifetime. . . .


    The next time he saw Miss Williams she smiled
broadly and came right up to him holding out her hand.
^^Oh, Pm so gladj Captain Savage. J.W. says youTe going
to be with us . .       . I’m sure it’ll be an enjoyable and
profitable experience for all parties.”
    ^Well, I don’t suppose I ought to count my chickens
before they’re hatched,” said Dick. “Oh, they’re hatched
all right,” said Miss Williams, beaming at him.
    In the middle of May Dick came back from Cologne
with a hangover after a party with a couple of aviators
and some German girls. Going out with German girls was
strictly against orders from G.H.Q. and he was nervous
for fear they might have been seen conducting them-
selves in a manner unbecoming to officers and gentlemen.
He could still taste the sekt with peaches in it when he
got off the tram at the Gare du Nord. At the office Colonel
Edgecombe noticed how pale and shaky he looked and
kidded him about what a tremendous time they must be
having in the occupied area. Then he sent him home to
rest up. When he got to his hotel he found a pneumatique
from Anne Elizabeth*
    I’m staying at the Continental and must see you at
once.
    He took a hot bath and went to bed and slept for sev-
eral hours. When he woke up it was already dark. It was
some time before he remembered Anne Elizabeth’s let-

ter. He was sitting on the edge of the bed sullenly buck-
ling his puttees to go around and see her when there was a
knock on his door. It was the elevatorman telling him a
Jady was waiting for him downstairs. The elevatorman
had hardly said it before Anne Elizabeth came running
down the hall. She was pale and had a red bruise on one

         394.

832
side of her face* Something cantankerous in the way she
ran immediately got on Dick’s nerves. “I told them I was
your sister and ran up the stairs,” she said, kissing him
breathlessly. Dick gave the elevatorman a couple of
francs and whispered to her, ^^Come in. What’s the mat-
ter?” He left the room door half open.
    ^^I’m in trouble . .    . the N.E.R. is sending me home,”
    ^^How’s that?”
    ^Tlayed hookey once too often, I guess . . . I’m just
as glad, they make me tired.”
    ^^How did you hurt yourself?”
    “Horse fell with me down at Ostia . .       . I’ve been hav-
ing the time of my life riding Italian cavalry horses         .  . .

they’ll take anything.”
    Dick was looking her hard in the face trying to make
her out. “Well,” he said, “is it all right?                   , I’ve got
to know .    . . I’m worried sick about it.”
    She threw herself face down on the bed. Dick tiptoed
over and gently closed the door. She had her head stuck
into her elbow and was sobbing. He sat on the edge of the
bed and tried to get her to look at him. She suddenly got
up and began walking around the room. “Nothing does
any good . .     . I’m going to have the baby .            .  . Oh,
 I’m so worried about Dad. I’m afraid it’ll kill him if he
                                                                   you’re so mean.”
 finds out  . . . Oh, you’re so mean .      . .
     “But, Anne Elizabeth, do be reasonable . . . Can’t we
 go on bemg friends? I’ve just been offered a very fine
 position when I get out of the service, but I can’t take a
 wife and child at this stage of the game, you must under-
 stand that . . . and if you want to get married there are
 plenty of fellows who’d give their eyeteeth to mzrry
 you ... You know how popular you are ... I don’t
 think marriage means anything anyway.”
     She sat down in a chair and immediately got up again
 She was laughing* “If Dad or Buster was here it would
 be a shotgun wedding, I guess . . . but that wouldn’t help

                                                                                395

833
                                                                                  he was
xnuch.^' Her hysterical laugh got on his nerves j
shaking from the effort to control himself and talk rea-

sonably.
    ^Why not G. H. Barrow? He’s a prominent man and
has money . .  He’s crazy about you, told me so himself
when I met him at the Crillon the other day . .          . After

all, we have to be sensible about things . . . It’s no more
my fault than it is yours ... if you’d taken proper pre-
                     ”
cautions. . .
    She took her hat off and smoothed her hair in the mirror.
Then she poured some water out in his washbasin, washed
her face and smoothed her hair again. Dick was hoping
she’d go, everything she did drove him crazy. There were
tears in her eyes when she came up to him. ^^Give me a
kiss, Dick . . . don’t worry about me            , . . I’ll work
things out somehow.”
    “I’m sure it’s not too late for an operation,” said Dick.
“I’ll find out an address tomorrow and drop you a line
to the Contmental . . . Anne Elizabeth . . . it’s splen-
did of you to be so splendid about this,”
    She shook her head, whispered goodby and hurried out
of the room.
    “Well, that’s that,” said Dick aloud to himself. He felt
terribly sorry about Anne Elizabeth. Gee, I’m glad I’m
not a girl, he kept thinking. He had a splitting headache.
He locked his door, got undressed and put out the light.
When he opened the window a gust of raw rainy air came
into the room and made him feel better. It was just like
Ed said, you couldn’t do anything without making other
people miserable. A hell of a rotten world. The streets in
front of the Gare St. Lazare shone like canals where the
streetlamps were reflected in them. There were still peo-
ple on the pavements, a man calling I’nTRANsigeant,
twangy honk of taxicabs. He thought of Anne Elizabeth
going home alone in a taxicab through the wet streets. He
wished he had a great many lives so that he might have

        396

834
 spent one of them with Anne Elizabeth. Might write a
 poem about that and send it to her. And the smell of the

 little cyclamens. In the cafe opposite the waiters were
 turning the chairs upside down and setting them on the

 tables. He wished he had a great many lives so that he
 might be a waiter in a cafe turning the chairs upside down.
 The iron shutters clanked as they came down. Now was the
 time the women came out on the streets, walking back and
 forth, stopping, loitering, walking back and forth, and
 those young toughs with skin the color of mushrooms.
 He began to shiver. He got into bed, the sheets had a
 clammy glaze on them. All the same Paris was no place to
 go to bed alone, no place to go home alone in a honking

 taxi, in the heartbreak of honking taxis. Poor Anne Eliza-

 beth. Poor Dick. He lay shivering between the clammy
 sheets, his eyes were pinned open with safetypins.
      Gradually he got warmer. Tomorrow. Seventhirty:
  shave, buclde puttees .  . . cafe au lait, brioches, beurre.
  He’d be hungry, hadn’t had any supper , . . deux oeux

. sur le plat. Bonjour m’ssieurs mesdames. Jingling spurs to
  the office. Sergeant Ames at ease. Day dragged out in

             twilight tea at Eleanor’s, make her talk to Moore-
  khaki j
  house to clinch job after the signing of the peace, tell her
  about the late General Ellsworth, they’ll laugh about it

  together. Dragged out khaki days until after the signing
  of the peace. Dun, drab, khaki. Poor Dick got to go to
  work after the signing of the peace. Poor Tom’s cold.
  Poor Dickyboy . . . fcchard . . . He brought his feet
  up to where he could rub them. Poor Richard’s feet. Aftet
  the Signing of the Peace.
      By the time his feet were warm he’d fallen asleep.







                                                                                 397

835
                                             NEWSREEL XXXVII


                 SOVIET GUARDS DISPLACED

        the American commander-in-chief paid tribute to the
dead and wounded, urged the soldiers to thank God for the
victory and declared that a new version of duty to God and
Country had come to all. When the numbers were hoisted it
was found that that of M. A, Aumont’s Zimzizimi was miss-

ing. The colt had been seized with a fit of coughing in the
morning and was consequently withdrawn almost at the last
moment

REPUBLICANS GETTING READY FOR THE
                       HECKLING OF WILSON

                 MOVE TO INDICT EXKAISER IN CHICAGO

                                  Johnny get your gun
                                          get your gun
                                               get your gun
                                  We^ve got em on the run

        we face a great change in the social structure of this
great country, declared Mr. Schwab, the man who becomes
the aristocrat of the future will become so not because of birth
or wealth but because he has done something for the good of
the country

          RUTHLESS WAR TO CRUSH REDS

                                           on the run
                                               on the run

         at the same time several columns of soldiers and sailors
appeared m front of the chancellor’s palace. The situation in
Germany is developing into a neck and neck race between
American food and Bolshevism. Find Lloyd George Taking
 Both Sides in Peace Disputes.

          3Q8

836
                     Oh that tattooed French Ladee
                          Tattooed from neck to knee
                     She was a sight to see
   MACKAY OF POSTAL CALLS BURLESON
                                      BOLSHEVIK

        popular demonstrations will mark the visits of the Presi-
dent and of the rulers of Great Britain and Belgium who will
be entertained at a series of fetes. The irony of the situation
lies in the fact that the freedom of speech and the press for
which the social democrats clamored is now proving the chief
source of menace to the new government

                      Right across her jaw
                          Was the Royal Flying Corfs
                      On her back was the Union Jack
                          Now could you ask for more?

         the war department today decided to give out a guarded
bulletin concerning a near mutiny of some of the American
troops in the Archangel sector and their refusal to go to the
front when ordered in spite of police orders comparative quiet
prevailed, but as the procession moved along the various
avenues, Malakoff, Henri Martin, Victor Hugo, and the
Trocadero and through the district in the aristocratic quarter
of Paris in which Jaures lived there was a feeling of walking
over mined roads where the merest incident might bring
about an explosion

 REINFORCEMENTS RUSHED TO REMOVE
                            CAUSE OF ANXIETY

                      All uf and down her sfine
                           Was the Kings Own Guard in line
                      And all around her hifs
                          Steamed a fleet of battleshifs

         the workers of Bavaria have overcome their party divisions
 and united m a mighty bloc against all domination and ex-
 ploitation; they have taken over in Workers, Soldiers and
 Peasant’s Councils entire public authority

                                                                                         399

837
                   Right above her kidney
                       Was a birdseye mew of Sydney
                   But what I loved best was across her chest
                       My home in Tennessee
FORMER EASTSIDERS LARGELY RESPON-
            SIBLE FOR BOLSHEVISM, SAYS
                                 DR. SIMONS
    ORDERS HOUSING OF LABOR IN PALACES

                 UKRAINIANS FIRE ON ALLIED MISSION

       it looks at present as if Landru would be held responsible
for the deaths of all the women who have disappeared in
France, not only for the past ten years but for many decades
previously



                              THE CAMERA EYE (40)


        I walked all over town general strike no busses

no taxicabs the gates of the Metro closed             Place de

lena I saw red flags Anatole France in a white beard

placards MUTILES DE LA GUERRE and the nut-

cracker faces of the agents de surete

        Mort aux vaches

        at the place de la Concorde the Republican Guards in

christmastree helmets were riding among the crowd

whacking the Parisians with the flat of their swords

scraps of the Internationd worriedlookmg soldiers in their

helmets lounging with grounded arms all along the

Grands Boulevards

        400

838
        Vive les poilus

        at the Republique        a bas la guerre MORT AUX
VACHES a bas la Paix des Assassins theyVe torn up

the gratings from around the trees and are throwing stones

and bits of cast iron at the fancydressed republican guards

hissing whistling poking at the horses with umbrel-

las      scraps of the Interm^tional

       at the Gare de PEst they^re singing the Internationd

entire        the gendarmerie nationale is making its way

slowly down Magenta into stones whistles bits of iron the

International Mort Aux Vaches Barricades we must

build barricades young kids are trying to break down the

shutters of an arms shop revolver shots an old woman in

a window was hit (Whose blood is that on the cobbles?)

weVe all running down a side street dodging into court-

yards concierges trying to close the outside doors on cav-

alry charging twelve abreast firecracker faces scared and

mean behind their big moustaches under their Christmas-

tree helmets

        ata corner I run into a friend running too Look

out They^re shooting to kill and its begun to rain hard

so we dive in together just before a shutter slams down

on the door of the little cafe dark and quiet inside a few

working men past middle age are grumblingly drinking at

the bar Ah les salops There are no papers Some-

body said the revolution had triumphed in Marseilles and

Lille Ca va taper dure We drink grog americain our

                                                                               401

839
feet are wet at the next table two elderly men are play-

ing chess over a bottle of white wine

       later we peep out from under the sliding shutter

that’s down over the door into the hard rain on the empty

streets only a smashed umbrella and an old checked cap

side by side in the clean stone gutter and a torn handbill
L’UNION DES TRAVAILLEURS FERA



                                      NEWSREEL XXXVIII


                           C^est la lutte finale
                               Groufons-'nous et demain
                           IdInternationale
                               Sera le genre humain

                 FUSILLADE IN THE DIET

  Y.M.C.A. "WORKERS ARRESTED FOR STEALING FUNDS

        declares wisdom of people alone can guide the nation in
such an enterprise SAYS U.S. MUST HAVE WORLD’S
GREATEST FLEET when I was in Italy a little limflng
grouf of wounded Italian soldiers sought an interview with
         I could not conjecture what they were going to say to
mey and with the greatest simflicityy with a touching sim’^

fHetty they fresented me with a fetltion in favor of the League
of Nations, Soldiers Rebel at German Opera

ORDERED TO ALLOW ALL GREEKS TO DIE

                  CANADIANS RIOT IN BRITISH CAMP

                    jlrise ye fris^ners of starvation
                   Arise ye wretched of the earth
                    For justice thunders condemnation
         402

840
                  A qui la Faute si le Beurre est Cher?

         GAINS RUN HIGH IN WALL
                                   STREET
                         MANY NEW RECORDS

    NE SOYONS PAS LES DUPES DU TRAVESTI BOLCHEVISTE

        the opinion prevails in Washington that while it might
be irksome to the American public to send troops to Asia Minor
people would be more willing to use an army to establish order
south of the Rio Grande. Strikers menace complete tieup of
New York City. Order restored in Lahore. Lille under-
takes on strike

    THREAT OF MUTINY BY U. S. TROOPS

    CALIFORNL^ JURY QUICKLY RENDERS VERDICT AGAINST
                             SACRAMENTO WORKERS

                       ^Tis the final conflict
                           Let each stand in hts flace
                        The international forty
                           Shall he the human race

 BOLSHEVISM READY TO COLLAPSE SAYS
                         ESCAPED GENERAL

        the French Censor will not allow the Herald to say what
the Chinese Delegation has done but that there is serious un-

rest It would be idle to deny. Men who have been deprived

of the opportunity to earn a living, who see their children

crying for food, who face an indefinite shutdown of indus-

tries and a possible cessation of railway traific with all the

disorganization of national life therein implied, can hardly be

expected to view the situation calmly and with equanimity

   BRITISH TRY HARD TO KEEP PROMISE
                            TO HANG KAISER
                                                                               403

841
       It IS declared the Coreans are confident President Wilson

will come m an aeroplane and listen to their views. A white

flag set up on Seoul Hill is presumed to indicate the landing-
place

                                                            DAUGHTER


   She wasn’t sick a bit and was very popular on the cross-
ing that was very gay although the sea was rough and it
was bitter cold. There was a Mr. Barrow who had been
sent on a special mission by the President who paid her a
great deal of attention. He was a very interesting man and
full of information about everything. He’d been a social-

ist and very close to labor. He was so interested when she
told him about her experiences in the textile strike over in
Jersey. In the evenings they’d walk around and around
the deck arm in arm, now and then being almost thrown
off their feet by an especially heavy roll. She had a little
trouble with him trying to make love to her, but managed
to argue him out of it by telling him what she needed
right now was a good friend, that she’d had a very un-
happy love affair and couldn’t think of anything like that
any more. He was so kind and sympathetic, and said he
could understand that thoroughly because his relation with
women had been very unsatisfactory all his life. He said
people ought to be free in love and marriage and not tied
by conventions or inhibitions. He said what he believed In
was passionate friendship. She said she did too, but when
he wanted her to come to his room in the hotel the first
night they were in Paris, she gave him a terrible tongue-
lashing. But he was so nice to her on the trip down to
Rome that she began to think that maybe if he asked her
to marry him she might do It.
    There was an American officer on the train. Captain.
Savage, so good looking and such a funny talker, on bis

        404

842
way to Rome with important despatches. From the minute
she met Dick, Europe was wonderful. He talked French
and Italian, and said how beautiful the old tumbledown
towns were and screwed up his mouth so funnily when he
told stories about comical things that happened in the
war. He was a little like Webb only so much nicer and
more selfreliant and betterlooking. From the minute she
saw him she forgot all about Joe and as for G. H, Barrow,
she couldn^t stand the thought of him. When Captain
                                                                                         by
Savage looked at her it made her all melt up inside 5
the time they^d gotten to Rome she’d admitted to herself
she was crazy about him. When they went out walking
together the day they all made an excursion to the ruins
of the Emperor Hadrian’s villa, and the little town where
the waterfall was, she was glad that he’d been drinking.
She wanted all the time to throw herself in his armsj
there was something about the rainy landscape and the
dark lasciviouseyed people and the old names of the towns
and the garlic and oil in the food and the smiling voices
and the smell of the tiny magenta wildflowers he said were
called cyclamens that made her not care about anything
anymore. She almost fainted when he started to make love
to her. Oh, she wished he would, but No, No, she couldn’t
just then, but the next day she’d drink m spite of the pledge
she’d signed with the N.E.R. and shoot the moon. It
wasn’t so sordid as she’d expected but it wasn’t so wonder-
ful either, she was terribly scared and cold and sick, like
when she’d told him she hadn’t ever before. But the next
day he was so gentle and strong, and she suddenly felt
very happy. .When he had to go back to Paris and there
was nothing but ofEce work and a lot of dreary old maids
to talk to, it was too miserable.
    When she found she was going to have a baby she was
                                                                       of course he’d
scared, but she didn’t really care so much 5
marry her. Dad and Buster would be sore at first but
they’d be sure to like him. He wrote poetry and was going

                                                                               405

843
                                                                         she was sure
CO be a writer when he got out of the army j
he was going to be famous. He didn’t write letters very
often and when she made him come back to Rome he
                                                                                  but of
wasn’t nearly as nice about it as she expected 3
course it must have been a shock to him. They decided
that perhaps it would be better not to have the baby just
then or get married till he got out of the service, though
there didn’t seem to be any doubt in his mind about get-
ting married then. She tried several things and went rid-
ing a great deal with Lieutenant Grassi, who had been ed-
ucated at Eton and spoke perfect English and was so
charming to her and said she was the best woman rider
he’d ever known. It was on account of her going out riding
so much with Lieutenant Grassi and getting in so late that
the old cats at the N.E.R. got sore and sent her home to
America.
    Going to Paris on the train, Daughter really was scared.
The horseback riding hadn’t done any good, and she was
sore all over from a fall she’d had when one of Lieutenant
Grassi’s cavalry horses fell with her and broke his leg
when she took him over a stone wall. The horse had to be
shot and the Lieutenant had been horrid about it these
                                                                                  3
foreigners always showed a mean streak in the end. She
was worried about people’s noticing how she looked be-
cause it was nearly three months now. She and Dick would
have to get marned right away, that’s all there was to it.
Perhaps it would even be better to tell people they’d been
marned in Rome by a fat little old priest.
    The minute she saw Dick’s face when she was running
dowm the corridor towards him in his hotel,^ she knew it
was all over, he didn’t love her the least bit. She walked
home to her hotel hardly able to see where she was going
through the slimywet Paris streets. She was surprised
when she got there because she expected she’d lose her
way. She almost hoped she’d lose her way. She went up
to her room and sat down in a chair without taking off her
         406

844
dripping wet hat and coat. She must think. This was the
end of everything.
    The next morning she went around to the oiEcej they
gave her her transportation back home and told her what
boat she was going on and said she must sail in four days.
After that she went back to the hotel and sat down in a
chair again and tried to think. She couldn^t go home to
Dallas like this. A note from Dick came around giving
her the address of a doctor.
    Do forgive me, he wrote. You’re a wonderful girl and
I’m sure it’ll be all right.
    She tore the thin blue letter up in little tiny pieces and
dropped it out the window. Then she lay down on the bed
and cried till her eyes burned. Her nausea came on and
she had to go out in the hall to the toilet. When she lay
down again she went to sleep for a while and woke up
feeling hungry.
                                         sunlight was streaming into the
    The day had cleared 5
room. She walked downstairs to the desk and called up
G. H. Barrow in his ofEce. He seemed delighted and said
if she’d wait for him a half an hour, he’d come and fetch
her out to lunch in the Boisj they’d forget everything ex-
cept that it was spring and that they were beautiful pagans
at heart. Daughter made a sour face, but said pleasantly
enough over the phone that she’d wait for him.
    When he came he wore a sporty grey flannel suit and
a grey fedora hat. She felt very drab beside him in the
darkgray uniform she hated so. “Why, my dearest little
girl .    .  . you’ve saved my life,” he said. “Su-su-spring
makes me think of suicide unless I’m in lu-lu-love ... I
was feeling .   .  . er .   .  . er .    . . elderly and not in love.
We must change all that.” “I was feeling like that too.”
“What’s the matter?” “Well, maybe I’ll tell you and
maybe I won’t.” She almost liked his long nose and his
long jaw today. “Anyway, I’m too starved to talk.” “I’ll
do all the talking .      . he said laughing. “Alwawaways

                                                                               407

845
do anywawaway * .  and Pll set you up to the bububest
jueal you ever ate.”
    He talked boisterously all the way out in the cab about
the Peace Conference and the terrible fight the President
had had to keep his principles intact. “Hemmed in by
every sinister intrigue, by all the poisonous ghosts of se-

cret treaties, with two of the cleverest and most unscrupu-
lous manipulators out of oldworld statecraft as his
opponents . . . He fought on ... we are all of us fight-
ing on .   . . It’s the greatest crusade in history^ if we win,
the world will be a better place to live in, if we lose, it
will be given up to Bolshevism and despair    . .   . you can
imagine, Anne Elizabeth, how charming it was to have
your pretty little voice suddenly tickle my ear over the
telephone and call me away if only for a brief space from
all this worry and responsibility . . . why, there’s even a
rumor that an attempt has been made to poison the Presi-
dent at the hotel Murat . . . it’s the President alone
with a few backers and wellwishers and devoted adher-
ents who is standing out for decency, fairplay and good
sense, never forget that for an instant. . . He talked on
md on as if he was rehearsing a speech. Daughter heard
him faintly like through a faulty telephone connection.
The day too, the little pagodas of bloom on the horsechest-
nuts, the crowds, the overdressed children, the flags against
the blue sky, the streets of handsome houses behind trees
with their carved stonework and their iron balconies and
their polished windows shining in the May sunshine;
Paris was all little and bright and far away like a picture
seen through the wrong end of a field glass. When the
luncheon came on at the big glittery outdoor restaurant

it was the same thing, she couldn’t taste what she was
eating.
    He made her drink quite a lot of wine and after a
while she heard herself talking to him. She’d never talked
like this to a man before. He seemed so understanding

         408

846
and kind. She found herself talking to him about Dad and
how hard it had been giving up Joe Washburn, and how
going over on the boat her life had suddenly seemed all
new . . . ^^Somethin^ funny^s happened to me, I declare

^    . I always used to get along with everybody fine and
now I can’t seem to. In the N.E.R. office in Rome I

couldn’t get along with any of those old cats, and I got

to be good friends with an Italian boy, used to take me
horseback riding an’ I couldn’t get along with him, and
you know Captain Savage on the train to Italy who let us

ride in his compartment, we went out to Tivoli with him,”
her ears began to roar when she spoke of Dick. She was
gomg to tell Mr. Barrow everything. “We got along so

well we got engaged and now I’ve quarreled with him.”
    She saw Mr. Barrow’s long knobbly face leaning to-

wards her across the table. The gap was very wide between

 his front teeth when he smiled. “Do you think, Annie

 girl, you could get along with me a little?” He put his

 skinny puffyveined hand towards her across the table. She
 laughed and threw her head to one side, “We seem to be

 gettin’ along all right right now.”
                                                                                         you
     “It would make me very happy if you could . . .
 make me very happy anyway, just to look at you          . . .

 I’m happier at this moment than I’ve been for years, ex-

 cept perhaps for the mumumoment when the Covenant

 for the League of Nations was signed.”
     She laughed again, “Well, I don’t feel like any Peace

 Treaty, the fact is I’m in terrible trouble.” She found her-
                                                      the upper lip thinned, he
 self watching his face carefully j
 wasn’t smiling any more.
      ^^Why, what’s the mamamatter ... if there was any
  wawaway I could ... er ... be of any assistance . . .

  I’d be the happiest fellow in the world.”
      “Oh, no ... I hate losing my job though and having

 to go home in disgrace . . . that’s about the size of it      . . .

  it’s all my fault for rxmning around like a little nitwit”

                                                                                 409

847
She was going to break down and cry, but suddenly the
nausea came on again and she had to hurry to the ladies'
room of the restaurant. She got there just in time to
throw up. The shapeless leatherfaced woman there was

                                               it scared Daughter how she
very kind and sympathetic 3
immediately seemed to know what was the matter. She
didn’t know much French but she could see that the
woman was asking if it was Madame’s first child, how
many months, congratulating her. Suddenly she decided
she’d kill herself. When she got back Barrow had paid
the bill and was walking back and forth on the gravel path
in front of the tables,
    ^^You poor little girl,” he said. “What can be the matter?
You suddenly turned deathly pale.”
    “It’s nothing ... I think I’ll go home and lie down

, . . I don’t think all that spaghetti and garlic agreed
with me in Italy . . . maybe it’s that wine.”
    “But perhaps I could do something about finding you a
job in Paris. Are you a typist or stenographer?”
    “Might make a stab at it,” said Daughter bitterly. She
hated Mr. Barrow. All the way back in the taxi she couldn’t
get to say anything. Mr. Barrow talked and talked. When
she got back to the hotel she lay down on the bed and
gave herself up to thinking about Dick.
    She decided she’d go home. She stayed in her room and
although Mr. Barrow kept calling up asking her out and
making suggestions about possible jobs she wouldn’t see
him. She said she was having a bilious attack and would
stay in bed. The night before she was to sail he asked her
to dine with him and some friends and before she knew it
she said she’d go along. He called for her at six and took
her for cocktails at the Ritz Bar. She’d gone out and
bought herself an evening dress at the Galleries Lafayette
and was feeling fine, she was telling herself as she sat
drinking the champagne cocktail, that if Dick should come
in now she wouldn’t bat an eyelash. Mr. Barrow was talk-
         410

848
ing about the Fiume situation and the diJEculties the Pres-
ident was having with Congress and how he feared that
the whole great work of the League of Nations was in
danger, when Dick came in looking very handsome in his
uniform with a pale older woman in grey and a tall stout-
ish lighthaired man, whom Mr. Barrow pointed out as

J. Ward Moorehouse. Dick must have seen her but he
wouldn’t look at her. She didn’t care anymore about any-
thing. They drank down their cocktails and went out. On
the way up to Montmartre she let Mr. Barrow give her a
long kiss on the mouth that put him in fine spirits. She
                    she had decided she’d kill herself.
didn’t care 3
    Waiting for them at the table at the Hermitage Mr.
Barrow had reserved, was a newspaper correspondent
named Burnham and a Miss Hutchins who was a Red
Cross worker. They were very much excited about a man
named Stevens who had been arrested by the Army of Oc-
cupation, they thought accused of Bolshevik propaganda 5
he’d been courtmartialed and they were afraid he was
going to be shot. Miss Hutchins was very upset and said
Mr. Barrow ought to go to the President about it as soon
as Mr. Wilson got back to Pans. In the meantime they
had to get the execution stayed. She said Don Stevens was
a newspaper man and although a radical not connected
with any kind of propaganda and anyway It was horrible
to shoot a man for wanting a better world. Mr. Barrow
was very embarrassed and stuttered and hemmed and
hawed and said that Stevens was a very silly young man
who talked too much about things he didn’t understand,
but that he supposed he’d have to do the best he could to
try to get him out but that after all, he hadn’t shown the
proper spirit.   . . . That made Miss Hutchins very angry,
^^But they’re going to shoot him . , . suppose it had hap-
pened to you . .          she kept saying. ^^Can’t you under-
stand that we’ve got to save his life?”
    Daughter cc^uldn’t seem to think of anything to say as

                                                                               411

849
she didn’t know what they were talking about} she sat

there in the restaurant looking at the waiters and the lights
and the people at the tables. Opposite there was a party

of attractive looking young French officers. One of them,
a tall man with a hawk nose, was looking at her. Their
eyes met and she couldn’t help grinning. Those boys looked

as if they were having a fine time. A party of Americans
dressed up like plush horses crossed the floor between her
and the Frenchmen. It was Dick and the pale woman and

J. Ward Moorehouse and a big middleaged woman in a
great many deep pink ruffles and emeralds. They sat down
at the table next to Daughter’s table where there had been
a sign saying Reservee all evening. Everybody was intro-
duced and she and Dick shook hands very formally, as

if they were the merest acquaintances. Miss Stoddard,
whom she’d been so friendly with in Rome, gave her a
quick inquisitive cold stare that made her feel terrible.
    Miss Hutchins immediately went over and began talk-
ing about Don Stevens and trying to get Mr, Moorehouse
to call up Colonel House right away and get him to take
some action in his case. Mr. Moorehouse acted very quiet
and calm and said he was sure she need have no anxiety,
he was probably only being held for investigation and in
any case he didn’t think the courtmartial in the Army of
Occupation would take extreme measures against a avilian
and an American citizen. Miss Hutchins said all she
wanted was a stay because his father was a friend of La
Follette’s and would be able to get together considerable
influence in Washington. Mr. Moorehouse smiled when
he heard that. “If his life depended on the influence of
Senator La Follette, I think you would have cause to be
alarmed, Eveline, but I think I can assure you that it
doesn’t.” Miss Hutchins looked very cross when she heard
that and settled back to glumly eating her supper. Any-
way the party was spoiled. Daughter couldn’t imagine what
it was that had made everybody so stiff and constrained}

        412

850
maybe she was imagining it on account of her and Dick*
Now and then she gave him a sideways glance. He looked
so different from the way she’d known him sitting there
so prim and prissylooking, talking to the stout woman in
pink in a low pompous whisper now and then. It made
her want to throw a plate at him.
    It was a relief when the orchestra started playing dance
music. Mr. Barrow wasn’t a very good dancer and she
didn’t like the way he kept squeezing her hand and patting
her neck. After they were through dancing they went into
the bar to have a gin fizz. The ceiling was hung witfi
                                the four French officers were in there
tricolor decoration j                                                              j
there were people singing La Madelon de la Victoire and
all the tough little girls were laughing and talking loud
shrill French. Mr. Barrow was whispering in her ear all
the time, “Darling girl, you must let me take you home
tonight. ... You mustn’t sail           . .   . I’m sure I can ar-
range everything with the Red Cross or whatever it is.

.  . . I’ve led such an unhappy life and I think I’d kill
myself if I had to give you up , .            . couldn’t you love
me just a little .    .  . I’ve dedicated my life to unattainable
ideals and here I am getting old without grasping true
happiness for a moment. You’re the only girl I’ve ever
known who seemed really a beautiful pagan at heart . . .

appreciate the art of life.” Then he kissed her wetly in
the ear.
    “But, George, I can’t love anybody now ... I hate
everybody.”
                                             just give me a chance.”
    “Let me teach you . . .
    “If you knew about me, you wouldn’t want me,” she said
coldly. She caught again a funny scared look on his face
'and a thinning of his lips over his widely spaced teeth.
    They went back to the table. She sat there fidgeting
while everybody talked carefully, with long pauses, about
the Peace Treaty, when it was going to be signed, whether
the Germans would sign. Then she couldn’t stand it any

                                                                               413

851
longer and went to the ladies’ room to powder her nose.
On the way back to the table she peeped into the bar to
see what was going on in there. The hawknosed French

officer caught sight of her, jumped to his feet, clicked his
heels together, saluted, bowed and said in broken English,
^^Charming lady, will you not stay a moment and drink
once with your umble servant Daughter went to their
table and sat down. ^^You boys looked like you were having
such a good time,” she said. ^T’m with the worst old set
of plush horses . . . They make me tired.” “Permettez,
mademoiselle,” he said, and introduced her to his friends.
He was an aviator. They were all aviation officers. His
name was Pierre. When she told them her brother had been
an aviator and had been killed, they were very nice to her.
She couldn’t help letting them think Bud had been killed
at the front. ^^Mademoiselle,” said Pierre solemnly, ^^allow
me, with all possible respect, to be your brother.” ^^Shake,”
she said. They all shook hands solemnly, they were drink-
ing little glasses of cognac, but after that they ordered
champagne. She danced with them all. She was very happy
and didn’t care what happened. They were young good-
looking boys, all the time laughing and nice to her. They
had clasped their hands and were dancing ring around the
rosy in the middle of the floor while everybody around
was clapping, when she saw Mr. Barrow’s face red arid
indignant in the door. Next time the doorway spun around
she yelled over her shoulder, ^^Be back in a minute,
teacher.” The face disappeared. She was dizzy but Pierre
                                                     he smelt of perfume but
caught her and held her tight j
still she liked having him hold her tight.
    He suggested they go somewhere else, ^^Mademoiselle
Sistair,” he whispered, ^^allow us to show you the mysteres
de Paree . . . afterwards we can come back to your plus
                                                                                       plus
orsairs. They will probably become intoxicate . . .
orsairs invariably into:ricate.” They laughed. He had grey
eyes and light hair, he said he was a Norman. She said

         414

852
he was the nicest Frenchman she’d ever met. She had ^
hard time getting her coat from the checkroom because
she didn’t have any check, but she went in and picked it
out while Pierre talked French to the checkgirj. They got
                                           Daughter had never seen such
into a -long low grey car 5
                                                                      he had a game
speeding. Pierre was a fine driver though 5
of running full speed towards a gendarme and swerving
just enough at the right moment. She said supposing he
              he shrugged his shoulders and said, ^Tt does not
hit one 5
mattair . . . they are .         . . ow do you call it?             .  .  .
bloody cows.” They went to Maxims, where it was too
quiet for them, then to a little tough dancehall way across
Paris. Daughter could see that Pierre was wellknown
everywhere and an Ace. The other aviators met girls in
different places and dropped away. Before she realized it
she and Pierre were alone in the long grey car. ^Trimo,’'
he was explaining,        will go to Les Halles to eat soupe
a I’oignon .   .  , and then I shall take you a little tour en
avion.” “Oh, please do. I’ve never been up in a plane

.  .  . I’d like to go up and loop the loop           .  .  . promise
you’ll loop the loop.” “Entendu,” he said.
   They sat a little sleepily in a small empty eatingplace
and ate onion soup and drank some more champagne. He
was still very kind and considerate but he seemed to have
exhausted his English. She thought vaguely about going
back to the hotel and catching the boattrain, but all she
seemed to be able to say was, “Loop the loop, promise me
you’ll loop the loop.” His eyes had gotten a little glazy,
“With Mademoiselle Sistair,” he said, “I do not make
love ... I make loop the loop.”
    It was a long drive out to the aviation field. A little
greyness of dawn was creeping over everything. Pierre
couldn’t drive straight any more, so that she had to grab
the wheel once or twice to steady him. When they drevi
up with a jerk at the field she could see the row of hangars
and three planes standing out in deepest blue and beyond,

                                                                              415

853
rows of poplartrees against the silver rim of the plain.
Overhead the sky sagged heavily like a wet tent. Daughter
got out of the car shivering. Pierre was staggering a little.
^Terhaps you will go instead to bed ... to bed it is very
good,” he said yawning. She put her arm around him,
^^You promised you’d take me up and loop the loop.”
^^Allright,” he said angrily and walked towards one of the
planes. He fumbled with the engine a while and she could
hear him swearing in French. Then he went into the
hangar to wake up a mechanic. Daughter stood there
shivering in the growing silvery light. She wouldn’t think
of anything. She wanted to go up in a plane. Her head
ached but she didn’t feel nauseated. When the mechanic
came back with Pierre she could make out that he was
arguing with him trying to make him give up the flight.
She got very sore: ^Tierre, you’ve got to take me up,” she
yelled at the two men sleepily arguing in French. ^^Aw-
rlght, Mademoiselle SIstair.” They wrapped a heavy army-
coat around her and strapped her very carefully in the
observer’s seat. Pierre climbed into the pilot seat. It was
a Bleriot monoplane, he said. The mechanic spun the
propeller. The engine started. Everything was full of the
roar of the engine. Suddenly she was scared and sober,
thought about home and Dad and Buster and the boat she
was going to take tomorrow, no it was today. It seemed
an endless time with the engine roaring. The light was
brighter. She started to fumble with the straps to unstrap
them. It was crazy going up like this. She had to catch that
boat. The plane had started. It was bouncing over the
field, bouncing along the ground. They were still on the
ground rumbling bouncing along. Maybe it wouldn’t go
up. She hoped it wouldn’t go up. A row of poplars swept
past below them. The motor was a settled roar now, they
                                                    a cold silver sun shone in
were climbing. It was daylight j
her face. Underneath them was a floor of thick white

854
clouds like a beach. She was terribly cold and stunned by
the roar of the motor. The man in goggles in front of
her turned around and yelled something. She couldn’t
hear. She’d forgotten who Pierre was. She stretched her
hand out towards him and waved it around. The plane
went on climbing steadily. She began to see hills standing
up in the light on either side of the white beach of clouds,
must be the valley of the Seine full of fogj where was
Paris? They were plunging into the sun, no, no, don’t,
don’t, now it’s the end. The white clouds were a ceding
overhead, the sun spun around once first fast then slowly
then the plane was climbing again. She felt terribly sick,
she was afraid she was going to faint. Dying must be like

this. Perhaps she’d have a miscarriage. Her body was
throbbing with the roar of the engine. She had barely
strength enough to stretch her hand toward him again
and make the same motion. The same thing again. This
time she didn’t feel so bad. They were climbing again
into blue sky, a wind must have come up because the
plane was lunging a little, took an occasional sickening
drop into a pocket. The face in the goggles turned around
and swayed from side to side. She thought the lips formed
                                    but now she could see Paris like an
the words, No good 3
embroidered pincushion, with all the steeples and the Eiffel
Tower and the towers of the Trocadero sticking up through
a milky haze. The Sacre Coeur on Montmartre was very
white and cast a shadow clear to the garden that looked
like a map. Then it was behind them and they were circling
over green country. It was rough and she began to feel

sick again. There was a ripping sound of some kind. A
little wire waving loose and glistening against the blue
began to whine. She tried to yell to the man in goggles.
He turned and saw her waving and went into another
dive. This time. No. Paris, the Eiffel Tower, the Sacr6
Coeur, the green fields spun. They were climbing again.

                                                                               417

855
              8




Daughter saw the shine of a wing gliding by itself a little
way from the plane. The spinning sun blinded her as they
dropped.



                                               NEWSREEL XXXIX


        spectacle of ruined villages and tortured earth ^^the work
of fiends’’ wrings heart of Mr. Hugh C. Wallace during his

visit to wasted and shelltorn regions

     WHIPPET TANKS ON FIFTH AVENUE STIR LOAN
                                        ENTHUSIASM

      U. S. MOBILIZES IN ORIENT AGAINST
                                   JAP MENACE

                     Rule Britanniay rule the waves
                     Britains never never shall be slaves

          YOUNG WOMAN FOUND STRANGLED IN YONKERS

        the socialrevolutionanes are the agents of Denekine,
Kolchak and the Allied Imperial Armies. I was one of the
organizers of the Soldiers, Sailors and Workmen’s council in
Seattle, 1 here is the same sentiment in this meeting that
appeared at our first meeting in Seattle when 5000 men in
uniform attended. EX-KAISER SPENDS HOURS IN
WRITING. Speaking broadly their choice is between revolu-
tionary socialism and anarchy. England already has plunged
into socialism, France hesitates, Belgium has gone, Italy is
going, while Lenme’s shadow grows stronger and stronger
Dver the conference.

  TEN SHIPS LAID BARRIER QF SUDDEN DEATH FROM
                             ORKNEYS TO SKAGGERAK

                           NO COAL? TRY PEAT

         4-1

856
                                                                                           )




                       If you want to find the generals
                           I know where they are
                       If you want to find the generals
                           I know where they are

       masses still don’t know how the war started, how it was
conducted or how it ended, declared Maximilian Harden,
The war ministry was stormed by demonstrators who dragged
out Herr Neunng and threw him into the Elbe where he was
shot and killed as he tried to swim to the bank

  VICIOUS PRACTICES RESPONSIBLE FOR HIGH LIVING
                    COST, WILSON TELLS CONGRESS

                                  / saw them
                                      I saw them
                                  Down in the
                                      Deef dugout




                               THE CAMERA EYE (41


       arent you coming to the anarchist picnic            there’s

going to be an anarchist picnic sure you’ve got to come to

the anarchist picnic this afternoon it was way out at Garches

in a kind of park it took a long time to get out there we

were late there were youngsters and young girls with

glasses and old men with their whiskers and long white

zits and everybody wore black artist ties              some had

taken off their shoes and stockings and were wandering

around in the long grass a young man with a black artist

tie was reading a poem Voila said a voice c’est plutot le

                                                                              419

857
geste proletaire it was a nice afternoon we sat on the grass

and looked around le geste proletaire

   But God damn it theyVe got all the machineguns in the

world all the printingpresses linotypes tickerribbon curling

irons plushhorses Ritz and we you I? barehands a few

iiongs not very good songs plutot le geste proletaire

               Les bourgeois a la lanterns nom de dieu


       et Phumanite la futurite la lutte des classes Pinepuis-

5ble angoisse des foules la misere du travailleur tu sais mon

vieux sans blague

       it was chilly early summer gloaming among the eight-

eenthcenturyshaped trees when we started home       I sat

on the imperiale of the third class car with the daughter

of the Libertaire (that’s Patrick Henry ours after all give
me or death) a fine girl her father she said never let her

go out alone never let her see any young men it was like

being in a convent she wanted liberty fraternity equality

and a young man to take her out     in the tunnels the coal-

gas made us cough and she wanted PAmerique la vie le

theatre le feev o’clock le smoking le foxtrot          she was a

nice girl we sat side by side on the roof of the car and

looked at the banlieue de Paris a desert of little ginger-

bread brick maisonettes flattening out under the broad
gloom of evening she and I tu sais mon ami but what kind

of goddam management is this?



        420

858
                                                      NEWSREEL XL

       CRIMINAL IN PYJAMAS SAWS BARS;
                     SCALES WALLS; FLEES

        Italians! against all and everything remember that the
beacon is lighted at Fmme and that all harangues are contained
in the words: Fmme or Death.
        Criez au quatre vents que je n’accepte aucune transaction.
Le reste ici contre tout le monde et je prepare de tres mauvais
jours.
        Criez cela je vous prie a tu-tete
        the call for enlistments mentions a chance for gold service
stripes, opportunities for big game hunting and thrilling water-
sports added to the general advantages of travel in foreign
countries
                                   Chi va fiano
                                       Va sano
                                   Chi va forte
                                       Va Ha morte
                                   Evvtva la hberta
    EARTHQUAKE IN ITALY DEVASTATES
                                   LIKE WAR

        only way Y.M.C.A. girls can travel is on troop ships*,
part of fleet will go seaward to help Wilson
      DEMPSEY KNOCKS OUT WILLARD IN
                             THIRD ROUND
       IIs sont sourds.
       Je vous embrasse.
       Le coeur de Fmme est a vous.

                                                                    JOE HILL

        A young Swede named Hillstrom went to sea, got
himself calloused hands on sailingships and tramps,

                                                                              4.11

859
                                        .




learned English in the focastle of the steamers that
make the run from Stockholm to Hull, dreamed the
Swede’s dream of the west;
        when he got to America they gave him a job
polishing cuspidors in a Bowery saloon.
        He moved west to Chicago and worked in a ma-
chineshop.
        He moved west and followed the harvest, hung
around employment agencies, paid out many a dollar
for a job in a construction camp, walked out many a
mile when the grub was too bum, or the boss too tough,
or too many bugs in the bunkhouse;
        read Marx and the I.W.W. Preamble and
dreamed about forming the structure of the new so-
ciety within the shell of the old.
        He was in California for the S.P. strike {Casey
                                                                  used to play the
Jonesy two locomotives, Casey Jones') y
concertina outside the bunkhouse door, after supper,
evenings {Longhaired preachers come out every night),
had a knack for setting rebel words to tunes {And the
union makes us strong)

         Along the coast in cookshacks flophouses jungles
wobblies hoboes bindlestifFs began singing Joe Hill’s
songs. They sang ’em in the county jails of the State
 of Washington, Oregon, California, Nevada, Idaho, in
 the bullpens in Montana and Arizona, sang ’em in
 Walla Walla, San Quentin and Leavenworth,
         forming the structure of the new society within
 the jails of the old.

         At Bingham, Utah, Joe Hill organized the work-
 ers of the Utah Construction Company in the One Big
 Union, won a new wagescale, shorter hours, better
 grub. (The angel Moroni didn’t like labororganizers
 any better than the Southern Pacific did.)
         422

860
        The angel Moroni moved the hearts of the Mor-
mons to decide it was Joe Hill shot a grocer named
Morrison. The Swedish consul and President Wilson
tried to get him a new trial but the angel Moroni moved
the hearts of the supreme court of the State of Utah to

sustain the verdict of guilty. He was in jail a year,
went on making up songs. In November 1915 be was
stood up against the wall in the jail yard in Salt Lake
City.
        “Don’t mourn for me organize,” was the last word
he sent out to the workmgstiffs of the I.W.W. Joe
Hill stood up against the wall of the jail yard, looked
into the muzzles of the guns and gave the word to fire.
        They put him in a black suit, put a stiff collar
around his neck and a bow tie, shipped him to Chicago
for a hangup funeral, and photographed his handsome
stony mask staring into the future.
        The first of May they scattered his ashes to the
wind.


                                                    BEN COMPTON


    The history of all hitherto existmg society is the history
of class struggles. .  .  .
   The old people were Jews but at school Benny always
said no he wasn’t a Jew he was an American because he’d
been born in Brooklyn and lived at 2531 25th Avenue in
Flatbush and they owned their home. The teacher in the
seventh grade said he squinted and sent him home with a
note, so Pop took an afternoon off from the jewelry store
where he worked with a lens in his eye repairing watches,
to take Benny to an optician who put drops in his eyes and
made him read little teeny letters on a white card. Pop
seemed tickled when the optician said Benny had to wear

                                                                              423

861
glasses, ‘^Vatchmaker^s eyes . . , takes after his old man/*
he said and patted his cheek. The steel eyeglasses were
heavy on Benny’s nose and cut into him behind the ears.

It made him feel funny to have Pop telling the optician
that a boy with glasses wouldn’t be a bum and a baseball
player like Sam and Isidore but would attend to his stud-

ies and be a lawyer and a scholar like the men of old. “A
rabbi maybe/’ said the optician, but Pop said rabbis were
loafers and lived on the blood of the poor, he and the old
woman still ate kosher and kept the sabbath like their
fathers but synagogue and the rabbis ... he made a spit-
ting sound with his lips. The optician laughed and said as
for himself he was a freethinker but religion was good for
the commonpeople. When they got home momma said the
glasses made Benny look awful old. Sam and Izzy yelled,
^^Hello, foureyes,” when they came in from selling papers,
but at school next day they told the other fads it was a states-
prison offence to roughhouse a feller with glasses. Once he
had the glasses Benny got to be very good at his lessons.
    In highschool he made the debating team. When he was
thirteen Pop had a long illness and had to give up work
for a year. They lost the house that was almost paid for
and went to live in a flat on Myrtle Avenue. Benny got
work in a drugstore evenings. Sam and Izzy left home,
Sam to work in a furrier’s in Newark5 Izzy had gotten to
loafing in poolparlors so Pop threw him out. He’d always
been a good athlete and palled around with an Irishman
named Pug Riley who was going to get him into the ring.
Momma cried and Pop forbade any of the kids to mention
his namej still they all knew that Gladys, the oldest one,
who was working as a stenographer over in Manhattan,
sent Izzy a five dollar bill now and then. Benny looked
much older than he was and hardly ever thought of any-
thing except making money so the old people could have
a house of their own again. When he grew up he’d be a
lawyer and a business man and make a pile quick so that

        424

862
Gladys could quit work and get married and the old people
could buy a big house and live in the country. Momma
used to tell him about how when she was a young maiden
in the old country they used to go out in the woods after
strawberries and mushrooms and stop by a farmhouse and
drink milk all warm and foamy from the cow. Benny
was going to get rich and take them all out in the country
for a trip to a summer resort.
    When Pop was well enough to work again he rented
half a twofamily house in Flatbush where at least they’d
be away from the noise of the elevated. The same year
Benny graduated from highschool and won a prize for an
essay on The American Government. He’d gotten very
tall and thin and had terrible headaches. The old people
said he’d outgrown himself and took him to see Dr. Cohen
who lived on the same block but had his ofSce downtown
near Borough Hall. The doctor said he’d have to give up
night work and studying too hard, what he needed was
something that would keep him outdoors and develop his
body. ^^All work and no play makes Jack a dull boy,” he
said, scratching the grizzled beard under his chin. Benny
said he had to make some money this summer because he
wanted to go to New York University in the fall. Dn
Cohen said he ought to eat plenty of milkdishes and fresh
eggs and go somewhere where he could be out in the sun
and take it easy all summer. He charged two dollars.
Walking home the old man kept striking his forehead with
the flat of his hand and saying he was a failure, thirty
years he had worked in America and now he was a sick
old man all used up and couldn’t provide for his children.
Momma cried, Gladys told them not to be silly, Benny was
a clever boy and a bright student and what was the use of
all his booklearning if he couldn’t think up some way of
getting a job in the country, Benny went to bed without
saying anything.
    A few days later Izzy came home. He rang the door

                                                                              425

863
bell as soon as the old man had gone to work one morn-
ing. ^^You almost met Pop,” said Benny who opened the
door. ^^Nutten doin’. I waited round the corner till I seen
him go. . .     . How’s everybody?” Izzy had on a light
grey suit and a green necktie and wore a fedora hat to
match the suit. He said he had to get to Lancaster, Penn-
sylvania, to fight a Filipino featherweight on Saturday.
“Take me with you,” said Benny. “You ain’t tough enough,
kid .   . . too much the momma’s boy.” In the end Benny
went with him. They rode on the L to Brooklyn Bridge
and then walked across New York to the ferry. They
bought tickets to Elizabeth. When the train stopped in a
freightyard they sneaked forward into the blind baggage.
At West Philadelphia they dropped off and got chased by
the yard detective. A brewery wagon picked them up and
carried them along the road as far as West Chester. They
had to walk the rest of the way. A Mennonite farmer let
them spend the night in his barn, but in the morning he
wouldn’t let them have any breakfast until they’d chopped
wood for two hours. By the time they got to Lancaster
Benny was all in. He went to sleep in the lockerroom at
the Athletic Club and didn’t wake up until the fight was
over. Izzy had knocked out the Filipino featherweight in
the third round and won a purse of twentyfive dollars.
He sent Benny over to a lodginghouse with the shine who
took care of the lockerroom and went out with the boys
to paint the town red. Next morning he turned up with
his face green and his eyes bloodshot, he’d spent all his
money, but he’d gotten jSenny a job helping a feller who
 did a little smalltime fightpromoting and ran a canteen in
a construction camp up near Mauch Chunk.
    It was a road job. Ben stayed there for two months earn-
 ing ten dollars a week and his keep. He learned to drive a
 team and to keep books. The boss of the canteen, Hiram
 Voile, gypped the construction workers in their accounts,
 but Benny didn’t think much about it because they were
         426

864
most o£ ’em wops, until he got to be friends with a young

fellow named Nick Gigli who worked with the gang at the

gravelpit. Nick used to hang around the canteen before
closingtime in the evenings then they’d go out and smoke
a cigarette together and talk. Sunday’s they’d walk out in
the country with the Sunday paper and fool around all aft-
ernoon lying in the sun and talhng about the articles in
the magazine section. Nick was from north Italy and all
the men in the gang were Sicilians, so he was lonely. His
father and elder brothers were anarchists and he was tooj
he told Benny about Bakunin and Malatesta and said
Benny ought to be ashamed of himself for wanting to get
                                         sure he ought to study and learn,
to be a rich businessman j
maybe he ought to get to be a lawyer, but he ought to
work for the revolution and the working class, to be a
business man was to be a shark and a robber like that son
ot a bitch Voile. He taught Benny to roll cigarettes and
told him about all the girls that were in love with him 5
that girl in the boxofEce of the movie in Mauch Chunk j
he could have her anytime he wanted, but a revolutionist
ought to be careful about the girls he went with, women
took a classconscious working man’s mind oflF his aims, they
v/ere the main seduction of capitalist society. Ben asked him
if he thought he ought to throw up his job with Voile, be-
cause Voile was such a crook, but Nick said any other capi-
talist would be the same, all they could do was wait fox
 the Day. Nick was eighteen with bitter brown eyes and a
skin almost as dark as a mulatto’s. Ben thought he was
 great on account of all he’d donej he’d shined shoes, been
 a sailor, a miner, a dishwasher and had worked in textile
 mills, shoefactories and a cement factory and had had alJ
 kinds of women and been in jail for three weeks in the
 Paterson strike. Round the camp if any of the wops saw
 Ben going anywhere alone he’d yell at him, ^^Hey, kid,
 where’s Nick?”
     On Friday evening there was an argument in front of

                                                                                4.27

865
the window where the construction boss was paying the
men off. That night, when Ben was getting into his bunk
in the back of the tarpaper shack the canteen was in, Nick
came around and whispered in his ear that the bosses had
been gypping the men on time and that they were going on
strike tomorrow. Ben said if they went out he’d go out too.
Nick called him a brave comrade in Italian and hauled off
and kissed him on both cheeks. Next morning only a few of
the pick and shovel men turned out when the whistle blew.
Ben hung around the door of the cookshack not knowing
what to do with himself. Voile noticed him and told him
to hitch up the team to go down to the station after a box
of tobacco. Ben looked at his feet and said he couldn’t be-
cause he was on stake. Voile burst out laughing and told
him to quit his kidding, funniest thing he’d ever heard of
a kike walking out with a lot of wops. Ben felt himself go
cold and stiff all over:           not a kike any more’n you are.

.  , . I’m an American born      .  .  . and I’m goin’ to stick
with my class, you dirty crook.” Voile turned white and
stepped up and shook a big fist under Ben’s nose and said
he was fired and that if he wasn’t a little f—g shrimp of
a foureyed kike he’d knock his goddam block off, anyway
his brother sure would give him a whaling when he heard
about it.
    Ben went to his bunk and rolled his things into a bundle
and went off to find Nick. Nick was a little down the road
where the bunkhouses were, In the center of a bunch of
wops all yelling and waving their arms. The superintend-
ent and the gangbosses all turned out with revolvers in
black holsters strapped around their waists and one ofi
them made a speech in English and another one Sicilian
saying that this was a squareshooting concern that had al-
ways treated laborers square and if they didn’t like^it they
could get the hell out. They’d ntvtr had a strike and didn’t
propose to begin now. There was big money involved in
this job and the company wasn’t going to work and see it

         428

866
 tied up by any goddam foolishness* Any man who wasn’t
 on his job next time the whistle blew was fired and would
 have to get a move on and remember that the State of
 Pennsylvania had vagrancy laws. When the whistle blew
 again everybody went back to work except Ben and Nick.
 They walked off down the road with their bundles. Nick
 had tears in bis eyes and was sayings ^^Too much gentle-
 too much patient ... we do not know our strength yet.’*
    That night they found a brokendown schoolhouse a little
 off the road on a hill above a river. They’d bought some
 bread and peanut butter at a store and sat out in front eat-
ing it and talking about what they’d do. By the time they’d
finished eating it was dark. Ben had never been out in the
country alone like that at night. The wind rustled the
woods all around and the rapid river seethed down in the
valley. It was a chilly August night with a heavy dew.
They didn’t have any covering so Nick showed Ben how to
take his jacket off and put it over his head and how to
sleep against the wall to keep from getting sore lying on
the bare boards. He’d hardly gotten to sleep when he woke
                                                                                          he
up icycold and shaking. There was a window broken 5
could see the frame and the jagged bits of glass against
the cloudy moonlight. He lay back, musta been dreaming.
Something banged on the roof and rolled down the shin-
gles over his head and dropped to the ground. ^^Hay, Ben,
for chrissake wassat?” came Nick’s voice in a hoarse whis-
per. They both got up and stared out through the broken
windowframe.
    ^That was busted before/^ said Nick. He walked over
and opened the outside door. They both shivered in the
chilly wmd up the valley that rustled the trees like rain,
the river down below made a creaking grinding noise like
a string of carts and wagons.
   A stone hit the roof above them and rolled off. The next
one went between their heads and hit the cracked plaster
of the wall behind. Ben heard the click of the blade as

                                                                              429

867
Nick opened his pocketknife. He strained his eyes till the
tears came but he couldn^t make out anything but the
leaves stirring in the wind.
   ^^You come outa there . . . come up here . . . talk

. .  , you son of a bitch,” yelled Nick.
   There was no answer.
    ^‘^What you think?” whispered Nick over his shoulder
to Ben.
                                            he was trying to keep his teeth
    Ben didn^t say anything j
from chattering. Nick pushed him back in and pulled the
door to. They piled the dusty benches against the door
and blocked up the lower part of the window with boards
out of the floor.
    ^^Break in. I keell one of him anyhow,” said Nick.
^^You donk believe in speerits?”
    “Naw, no such thing,” said Ben. They sat down side by
side on the floor with their backs to the cracked plaster and
listened. Nick had put the knife down between them. He
took Ben^s fingers and made him feel the catch that held
the blade steady. ^^Good knife . .  . sailor knife,” he whis-
pered. Ben strained his ears. Only the spattering sound of
the wind in the trees and the steady grind of the river. No
more stones came.
    Next morning they left the schoolhouse at first day.
Neither of them had had any sleep. Ben^s eyes were sting-
ing. When the sun came up they found a man who was
patching up a broken spring on a truck. They helped him
jack it up with a block of wood and he gave them a lift
into Scranton where they got jobs washing dishes in a
hashjoint run by a Greek.



    ... all fixed fastfrozen relationSy with their tram of
 ancient and venerable prejudices and opinionsy are swept
         430

868
awajy all newjormed ones become antiquated before they
can ossify. . . .
   Pearldiving wasn’t much to Ben’s taste, so at the end o£
a couple of weeks, as he’d saved up the price of the ticket,
he said he was going back home to see the old people. Nick
stayed on because a girl in a candystore had fallen for him.
Later he’d go up to Allentown, where a brother of his had
a job in a steelmill and was making big money. The last
thing he said when he went down and put Ben on the train
for New York was, ^‘^Benny, you learn and study ... be
great man for workingclass and remember too much girls
bad business.”
    Ben hated leaving Nick but he had to get home to find
a job for the winter that would give him time to study. He
took the exams and matriculated at the College of the City
of New York. The old man borrowed a hundred dollars
from the Morris Plan to get him started and Sam sent him
twentyfive from Newark to buy books with. Then he made
a little money himself working in Kahn’s drugstore eve-
nings. Sunday afternoons he went to the library and read
Marx’s Cafital. He joined the Socialist Party and went to
lectures at the Rand School whenever he got a chance. He
was working to be a wellsharpened instrument.
    The next spring he got sick with scarlet fever and was
ten weeks in the hospital. When he got out his eyes were
so bad it gave him a headache to read for an hour. The old
man owed the Morris Plan another hundred dollars be-
sides the fi.rst hundred dollars and the interest and the in-
vestigation fees.
    Ben had met a girl at a lecture at Cooper Union who
had worked in a textile mill over in Jersey. She’d
been arrested during the Paterson strike and had been
blacklisted. Now she was a salesgirl at Wanamaker’s, but
her folks still worked in the Botany Mill at Passaic. Her
name was Helen Mauerj she was five years older than
Ben, a pale blonde and already had lines in her face. She

                                                                               431

869
said tfiere was nothing in the socialist movement: it was
Che syndicalists had the right idea. After the lecture she
took him to the Cosmopolitan Cafe on 2nd Avenue to have
a glass of tea and introduced him to some people she said
                           when Ben told Gladys and the old people
were real rebels j
about them the old man said, “Pfooy . . . radical jews,”
and made a spitting sound with his lips. He said Benny
ought to cut out these monkeyshines and get to work. He
'Vas getting old and now he was in debt, and if he got sicis

it would be up to Benny to support him and the old
woman. Ben said he was working all the time but that
your folks didnh count, it was the workingclass that he
was working for. The old man got red in the face and said
his family was sacred and next to that his own people.
Momma and Gladys cried. The old man got to his feet 5
choking and coughing, he raised his hands above his head
and cursed Ben and Ben left the house.
    He had no money on him and was still weak from the
scarlet fever. He walked across Brooklyn and across the
Manhattan Bridge and up through the East Side, all full
of ruddy lights and crowds and pushcarts with vegetables
that smelt of the spring, to the house where Helen lived
on East 6th Street. The landlady said he couldn’t go up
to her room. Helen said it wasn’t any of her business but
while they were arguing about it his ears began to ring and
he fainted on the hall settee. When he came to with water
running down his neck Helen helped him up the four
flights and made him lie down on her bed. She yelled
down to the landlady who was screaming about the police,
that she would leave first thing in the morning and noth-
ing in the world could make her leave sooner. She made
Ben some tea and they sat up all night talking on her bed.
They decided that they’d live in free union together and
spent the rest of the night packing her things. She had
iKiostly books and pamphlets.
    Next morning they went out at six o’clock, because she

         43^

870
had to be at Wanamaker’s at eight, to look for a rooir *
They didn^t exactly tell the next landlady they weren’t
married, but when she said, “So you’re bride and groom?”
they nodded and smiled. Fortunately Helen had enough
money in her purse to pay the week m advance. Then she
had to run off to work. Ben didn’t have any money to buy
anything to eat so he lay on the bed reading Progress and
Poverty all day. When she came back in the evening she
brought in some supper from a delicatessen. Eating the rye
bread and salami they were very happy. She had such large
breasts for such a slender little girl. He had to go out ta
a drugstore to buy some safeties because she said how could
she have a baby just now when they had to give all theii
strength to the movement. There were bedbugs in the bed,
but they told each other that they were as happy as they
could be under the capitalist system, that some day they’d
have a free society where workers wouldn’t have to huddle
in filthy lodginghouses full of bedbugs or row with land^
ladies and lovers could have babies if they wanted to.
    A few days later Helen was laid off from Wanamaker’s
because they were cutting down their personnel for the
slack summer season. They went over to Jerse^^ where she
went to hve with her folks and Ben got a job in the ship-
ping department of a worsted mill. They rented a room
together in Passaic. When a strike came he and Helen were
both on the committee. Ben got to be quite a speechmaker.
He was arrested several times and almost had his skull
cracked by a policeman’s billy and got six months in jail
out of it. But he’d found out that when he got up on a
soapbox to talk he could make people listen to him, that
he could talk and say what he thought and get a laugh or
a cheer out of the massed upturned faces. When he stood
up in court to take his sentence he started to talk about
surplus value. The strikers in the audience cheered and the
judge had the attendants clear the courtroom. Ben could
see the reporters busily taking down what he saidj he was

                                                                               433

871
glad to be a living example of the injustice and brutality
of the capitalist system. The judge shut him up by saying
he^d give him another six months for contempt of court if
he didn’t keep quiet, and Ben was taken to the county jail
m an automobile full of special deputies with riot guns.
The papers spoke of him as a wellknown socialist agitator.
    In jail Ben got to be friends with a wobbly named Bram
Hicks, a tall youngster from Frisco with light hair and
blue eyes who told him if he wanted to know the labor-
movement he ought to get him a red card and go out to
the Coast. Bram was a boilermaker by profession but had
shipped as a sailor for a change and landed in Perth Amboy
broke. He’d been working on the repairshlft of one of the
mills and had gone out with the rest. He’d pushed a cop
in the face when they’d broken up a picketline and been
sent up for six months for assault and battery. Meeting
him once a day in the prison yard was the one thing kept
Ben going in jail.
   They were both released on the same day. They walked
along the street together. The strike was over. The mills
were running. The streets where there’d been picketlines,
the hall where Ben had made speeches looked quiet and or-
dinary. He took Bram around to Helen’s. She wasn’t there,
but after a while she came in with a little redfaced ferret-
nosed Englishman whom she introduced as Billy, an Eng-
lish comrade. First thing Ben guessed that he was sleeping
with her. He left Bram in the room with the Englishman
and beckoned her outside. The narrow upper hall of the
old frame house smelt of vinegar. ^‘You’re through with
me?” he asked in a shaky voice.
    ^^Oh, Ben, don’t act so conventional.”
    “You mighta waited till I got outa jail.”
    “But can’t you see that we’re all comrades? You’re a
brave fighter and oughtn’t to be so conventional, Ben. . . .
Billy doesn’t mean anything to me. He’s a steward on a
liner. He’ll be going away soon.”

         434

872
    ^^Then I don^t mean anything to you either.” He
grabbed Helen’s wrist and squeezed it as hard as he could.
     guess I’m all wrong, but I’m crazy about you. ... I
thought you . . .”
    “Ouch, Ben   . . . you’re talkin’ silly, you know ho'Vi'
much I like you.” They went back in the room and talked
about the movement. Ben said he was going west with
Bram Hicks.




   ... he hecomes an af'penda^e of the machine and it is
only the most simfle^ most monotonous^ most easily re-
quired knack that is required of him. .   .  .
    Bram knew all the ropes. Walking, riding blind baggage
or on empty gondolas, hopping rides on delivery wagons
and trucks, they got to Buffalo. In a flophouse there Bram
found a guy he knew who got them signed on as deckhands
on a whaleback going back light to Duluth. In Duluth they
joined a gang bemg shipped up to harvest wheat for ar
outfit in Saskatchewan. At first the work was very heavy
for Ben and Bram was scared he’d cave in, but the four-
teen hour days out in the sun and the dust, the copious
grub, the dead sleep in the lofts of the big barns began to
toughen him up. Lying flat on the straw in his sweaty
clothes he’d still feel through his sleep the tingle of the
sun on his face and neck, the strain in his muscles, the whir
of the reapers and binders along the horizon, the roar of
the thresher, the grind of gears of the trucks carrying the
red wheat to the elevators. He began to talk like a harvest
stiff. After the harvest they worked in a fruitcannery on
the Columbia River, a lousy steamy job full of the sour
stench of rotting fruitpeelings. There they read in Soli-
darity about the shingleweavers’ strike and the free speech
fight in Everett, and decided they’d go down and see what
they could do to help out. The last day they worked there

                                                                              435

873
Bram lost the forefinger of his right hand repairing the

slicing and peeling machinery. The company doctor said
he couldn^t get any compensation because he’d already
given notice, and, besides, not being a Canadian ... A
little shyster lawyer came around to the boarding house
where Bram was lying on the bed in a fever, with his hand
in a big wad of bandage, and tried to get him to sue, but
Bram yelled at the lawyer to get the hell out. Ben said he
was wrong, the working class ought to have its lawyers

too.
    When the hand had healed a little they went down on
the boat from Vancouver to Seattle. I.W.W, headquarters
there was like a picnic ground, crowded with young men
coming in from every part of the U.S. and Canada. One
day a big bunch went down to Everett on the boat to try
to hold a meeting at the corner of Wetmore and Hewitt
Avenues. The dock was full of deputies with rifles, and re-
volvers. ^^The Commercial Club boys are waiting for us,”
some guy’s voice tittered nervously. The deputies had
white handkerchiefs around their necks. “There’s Sheriff
McRae,” said somebody. Bram edged up to Ben. “We bet-
ter stick together. .    . . Looks to me like we was goin’ to
get tamped up some.” The wobblies were arrested as fast
as they stepped off the boat and herded down to the end of
the dock. The deputies were drunk most of them, Ben
could smell the whiskey on the breath of the redfaced guy
who grabbed him by the arm. “Get a move on there, you
son of a bitch  .  , He got a blow from a nflebutt in the
small of the back. He could hear the crack of saps on men’s
skulls. Anybody who resisted had his face beaten to a jelly
with a club. The wobblies were made to climb up into a
truck. With the dusk a cold drizzle had come on. “Boys,
we got to show ’em we got guts,” a redhaired boy said. A
deputy who was holding on to the back of the truck aimed
a blow at him with his sap but lost his balance and fell off.
The wobblies laughed. The deputy climbed on again, pur-

         436

874
pie In the face. “You’ll be laughin’ outa the other side oi
your dirty mugs when we get through with you,” he

yelled.
    Out m the woods where the county road crossed the
railroad track they were made to get out of the trucks.
The deputies stood around them with their guns leveled
while the sheriff who was reeling drunk, and two well-
dressed middleaged men talked over what they’d do. Ben
heard the word gauntlet. “Look here, sherilf,” somebody
said, “we’re not here to make any kind of disturbance. All
we want’s our constitutional rights of free speech.” The
sherijff turned towards them waving the butt of his revol-
ver, “Oh, you do, do you, you c           s. Well, this is Sno-
homish county and you ain’t goin’ to forget it ... if you
come here again some of you fellers is goin’ to die, that’s

all there is about it. . . . All right, boys, let’s go.”
    The deputies made two lines down towards the railroad
track. They grabbed the wobblies one by one and beat them
up. Three of them grabbed Ben. “You a wobbly?” “Sure I
am, you dirty yellow . . he began. The sheriff came up
and hauled off to hit him. “Look out, he’s got glasses on.”
A big hand pulled the glasses off. “We’ll fix that.” Then
the sheriff punched him in the nose with his fist. “Say you
ain’t.” Ben’s mouth was full of blood. He set his jaw.
“He’s a kike, hit him again for me.” “Say, you ain’t a wob-
bly.” Somebody whacked a riflebarrel against his shins and
he fell forward. “Run for it,” they were yelling. Blows
with clubs and riflebutts were splitting his ears.
    He tried to walk forward without running. He tripped
on a rail and fell, cutting his arm on something sharp.
There was so much blood in his eyes he couldn’t see. A
heavy boot was kicking him again and again in the side
He was passing out. Somehow he staggered forward. Some
body was holding him up under the arms and was drag-
ging him free of the cattleguard on the track. Another feh
low began to wipe his face off with a handkerchief. He

                                                                              437

875
heard Bram^s voice way off somewherCj “We’re over the
county line, boys ” What with losing his glasses and the
rain and the night and the shooting pain all up and down
his back Ben couldn’t see anything. He heard shots behind
them and yells from where other guys were running the
gauntlet. He was the center of a little straggling group of
Wobblies making their way down the railroad track. “Fel-
low workers,” Bram was saying in his deep quiet voice, “we
must never forget this night.”
   At the interurban trolley station they took up a collec-
tion among the ragged and bloody group to buy tickets to
Seattle for the guys most hurt. Ben was so dazed and sick
he could hardly hold the ticket when somebody pushed it
into his hand. Bram and the rest of them set off to walk
the thirty miles back to Seattle.
    Ben was in hospital three weeks. The kicks in the back
had affected his kidneys and he was in frightful pain most
of the time. The morphine they gave him made him so
dopey he barely knew what was happening when they
brought in the boys wounded in the shooting on the Ever-
ett dock on November 5th. When he was discharged he
could just walk. Everybody he knew was in jail. At Gen-
eral Delivery he found a letter from Gladys enclosing fifty
dollars and saying his father wanted him to come home.
    The Defense Committee told him to go ahead, he was
 just the man to raise funds for them in the east. An enor-
mous amount of money would be needed for the defense of
the seventyfour wobblies held in the Everett jail charged
 with murder. Ben hung around Seattle for a couple of
 weeks doing odd jobs for the Defense Committee, trying
 to figure out a way to get home. A sympatiiizer who
 worked in a shipping office finally got him a berth as super-
 cargo on a freighter that was going to New York through
 the Panama canal. The sea trip and the detailed clerical
 work helped him to puli nimself together. Still there wasn’t
 a night he didn’t wake up with a nightmare scream in his

          438

876
throat sitting up in his bunk dreaming the deputies were
coming to get him to make him run the gauntlet. When
he got to sleep again he’d dream he was caught in the
cattleguard and the teeth were tearing his arms and heavy
boots were kicking him in the back. It got so it took all hk
nerve to lie down in his bunk to go to sleep. The men on
the ship thought he was a hophead and steered clear of
him. It was a great day when he saw the tall buildings of
New York shining in the brown morning haze.




    . . . when in the course of development class distinc-
tions have disappeared and all production has been concen-
trated in the hands of a vast association of the whole nation^
the public power will lose its political character. . . .
    Ben lived at home that winter because it was cheaper.
When he told Pop he was going to study law in the olSce
of a radical lawyer named Morris Stein whom he’d met in
connection with raising money for the Everett boys, the
old man was delighted.         clever lawyer can protect the
workers and the poor Jews and make money too,” he said,
rubbing his hands. ^^Benny, I always knew you were a
good boy.” Momma nodded and smiled. ^^Because in this
country it’s not like over there under the warlords, even a
lazy bum’s got constitootional rights, that’s why they wrote
the constitootion for.” It made Ben feel sick talking to
them about it.
    He worked as a clerk in Stein’s office on lower Broad-
way and in the evenings addressed protest meetings about
the Everett massacre. Morris Stein’s sister Fanya, who was
a thin dark wealthy woman about thirtyfive, was an ardent
pacifist and made him read Tolstoy and Kropotkin. She
believed that Wilson would keep the country out of the
European war and sent money to all the women’s peace
organizations. She had a car and used to run him around

                                                                              439

877
town sometimes when he had several meetings iri one eve-
ning. His heart would always be thumping when he went
into the hall where the meeting was and began to hear the
babble and rustle of the audience filing in^ garment work-
ers on the East Side, waterfront workers in Brooklyn,
workers in chemical and metalproducts plants in Newark,
parlor socialists and pinks at the Rand School or on lower
"Fifth Avenue, the vast anonymous mass of all classes,
races, trades in Madison Square Garden. His hands would
always be cold when he shook hands with the chairman
and other speakers on the platform. When his turn came
to speak there^d be a moment when all the faces looking
up at him would blur into a mass of pink, the hum of the
hall would deafen him, heM be in a panic for fear he’d for-
gotten what he wanted to say. Then all at once he’d hear
his own voice enunciating clearly and firmly, feel its re-
verberance along the walls and ceiling, feel ears growing
tense, men and women leaning forward in their chairs, see
the rows of faces quite clearly, the groups of people who
couldn’t find seats crowding at the doors. Phrases like pro-
testy massactiony imited workmgclass of ths country and
the worldy revolutiony would light up the eyes and faces
under him like the glare of a bonfire.
    After the speech he’d feel shaky, his glasses would be
so misted he’d have to wipe them, he’d feel all the awk-
wardness of his tall gangling frame, Fanya would get him
away as soon as she could, tell him with shining eyes that
he’d spoken magnificently, take him downtown, if the
meeting had been in Manhattan, to have some supper in
the Brevoort basement or at the Cosmopolitan Cafe before
he went home on the subway to Brooklyn. He knew that
she w^as in love with him, but they rarely talked about
anything outside of the movement.
    When the Russian revolution came in February, Ben
and the Steins bought every edition of the papers for
weeks, read all the correspondents’ reports with desperate

         440

878
intentness; it was the dawning of The Day. There was a
feeling of carnival all down the East Side and in the Jew-
ish sections of Brooklyn. The old people cried whenever
they spoke of it. ^^Next Austria, then the Reich, then Eng-
land . . , freed peoples everywhere,” Pop would say.
‘^^And last, Uncle Sam,” Ben would add, grimly setting his
jaw.
   The April day Woodrow Wilson declared war, Fanya
went to bed with a hysterical crying fit. Ben went up to see
her at the apartment Morris Stein and his wife had on
Riverside Drive. SheM come back from Washington the
day before. She’d been up there with a women’s peace
delegation trying to see the President. The detectives had
run them off the White House lawn and several girls had
been arrested. “What did you expect? ... of course the
capitalists want war. They’ll think a little different when
they find what they’re getting-'s a revolution.” She begged
him to stay with her, but he left saying he had to go see
them down at The Call, As he left the house, he found
himself making a spitting noise with his lips like his father.
He told himself he’d never go there again.
    He registered for the draft on Stein’s advice, though he
wrote conscientious objector on the card. Soon after that he
and Stein quarrelled. Stein said there was nothing to it
but to bow before the storm; Ben said he was going to agi-
tate against it until he was put in jail. That meant he was
out of a job and it was the end of his studying law. Kahn
wouldn’t take him back in his drugstore because he was
afraid the cops would raid him if it got to be known he
had a radical working for him. Ben’s brother Sam was
working in a munition factory at Perth Amboy and mak-
ing big money; he kept writing Ben to stop his foolishness
and get a job there too. Even Gladys told him it was silly
to ram his head against a stone wall. In July he left home
and went back to live with Helen Mauer over in Passaic.
His number hadn’t been called yet, so it was easy to get a

                                                                              441

879
job In the shipping department of one of the mills. They
were working overtime and losing hands fast by the draft.
   The Rand School had been closed up, The Call sus-
pended, every day new friends were going around to Wil-
son^s way of looking at things. Helen’s folks and their
                                                                                      they
friends were maldng good money, working overtime 3
laughed or got sore at any talk of protest strikes or revolu-
                                people were buying washing machines,
tionary movements 3
liberty bonds, vacuum cleaners, making first payments on
houses. The girls were buying fur coats and silk stockings.
Helen and Ben began to plan to go out to Chicago, where
the wobblies were putting up a fight. September 2nd came
the roundup of I.W.W. officials by government agents.
Ben and Helen expected to be arrested, but they were
passed over. They spent a rainy Sunday huddled on the
bed in their dank room, trying to decide what they ought
to do. Everything they trusted was giving way under their

feet.      feel like a rat in a trap,” Helen kept saying. Every
now and then Ben would jump up and walk up and down
hitting his forehead with the palm of his hand. ^We gotta
do something here, look what they’re doing in Russia.”
    One day a warworker came around to the shipping de-
partment to sign everybody up for a Liberty Bond. He
was a cockylooking young man in a yellow slicker. Ben
wasn’t much given to arguments during working hours, so
 he just shook his head and went back to the manifest he
was making out. ^^You don’t want to spoil the record of
your department, do you? It’s one hundred percent perfect
 so fan” Ben tried to smile. ^Tt seems too bad, but I guess

 it’ll have to be.” Ben could feel the eyes of the other men
 in the office on him. The young man in the slicker was
 balancing uneasily from one foot to the other.             don’t
 suppose you want people to think you’re a pro-German or
 a pacifist, do you?” “They can suppose what they damn
 like, for all I care,” “Let’s see your registration card, I

 1 ^et you’re a slacker.” ^^Look here, get me,” said Ben, get-

          442

880
ting to his feetj        don^t believe in capitalist war and Pm
not going to do anything I can help to support it.” The
young man in the slicker turned his back, “Oh, if you’re
one of them yellow bastards I won’t even talk to you^”
Ben went back to work. That evening when he was punch-
ing the timeclock a cop stepped up to him. “Let’s see your
registration card, buddy.” Ben brought the card out from
his inside pocket. The cop read it over carefully, “Looks
all right to me,” he said reluctantly. At the end of the
week Ben found he was fired, no reason given.    ,
    He went to the room in a panic. When Helen came
back he said he was going to Mexico. “They coxild get me
under the espionage act for what I told that guy about
fighting capitalism.” Helen tried to calm him down, but
he said he wouldn’t sleep in that room another night, so
they packed their bags and went over to New York on the
train. They had about a hundred dollars saved up between
them. They got a room on East 8th Street under the
name of Mr. and Mrs. Gold. It was the next morning
that they read in the Times that the Maximalists had
taken over the government in Petrograd with the slogan
All Power to the Soviets. They were sitting in a small
pastry shop on 2nd Avenue drinking their morning coffee,
when Ben, who had run around to the newsstand for a
paper, came back with the news. Helen began to cry: “Oh,
darling, it’s too good to be true. It’s the world revolution.
 ... Now the workers ’ll see that they were being de-
ceived by false good times, that the war’s really aimed at
 them. Now the other armies ’ll start to mutiny.” Ben took
 her hand under the table and squeezed it hard. “We gotto
 work now, darling.   . . . I’ll go to jail here before I’ll run
 away to Mexico. Pd acted like a yellow bastard if it hadn’t
 been for you, Helen. ... A man’s no good alone,”
     They gulped their coffee and walked around to the
 Ferbers’ house on 17th Street. A1 Ferber was a doctor, a
 short stout man with a big paunchy he was just leaving

                                                                                44-^

881
the house to go to his oiEce. He went back into the hail
with them and yelled upstairs to his wife: “Molly, come
down .   . . Kerensky’s run out of Petrograd with a flea

in his ear    .  . . dressed as a woman he ran.” Then he
said in Yiddish to Ben that if the comrades were going to
hold a meeting to send greetings to the soldiers’ and
peasants’ government, he’d give a hundred dollars toward
expenses, but his name would have to be kept out of it or
else he’d lose his practice. Molly Ferber came downstairs
in a quilted dressing gown and said she’d sell something
and add another hundred. They spent the day going
                                                                                      they
around to find comrades they had the addresses of j
didn’t dare use the phone for fear of the wires being
rapped.
    The meeting was held at the Empire Casino in the
Bronx a week later. Two Federal agents with beefsteak
faces sat in the front row with a stenographer who took
down everything that was said. The police closed the
doors after the first couple of hundred people had come
in. The speakers on the platform could hear them break-
ing up the crowd outside with motorcycles. Soldiers and
sailors in uniform were sneaking into the gallery by ones
and twos and trying to stare the speakers out of counte-
nance.
    When the old whitehaired man who was chairman of
the meeting walked to the front of the stage and said,
“Comrades, gentlemen of the Department of Justice and
not forgetting our young wellwishers up in the gallery,
we have met to send a resolution of greetings from the
oppressed workers of America to the triumphant workers
of Russia,” everybody stood up and cheered. The crowd
milling around outside cheered too. Somewhere they could
hear a bunch singing the Intermtional, They could hear
policewhistles and the dang dang of a patrol wagon. Ben
                                                                            she looked
noticed that Fanya Stein was in the audience 5
pale and her eyes held onto him with a fixed feverish stare.

        444

882
When his turn came to speak he began tiy saying that on
account of tiie kind sympathizers from Washington in the
audience, he couldn’t say what he wanted to say but that
every man and woman in the audience who was not a
traitoi to their class knew what he wanted to say. . .           .
^^The capitalist governments are digging their own graves
by driving their people to slaughter in a crazy unnecessary
war that nobody can benefit from except bankers and
munition makers. ... The American working class, like
the working classes of the rest of the world, will lean?
their lesson. The profiteers are giving us instruction in the
use of gunsj the day will come when we will use it.”
^^That’s enough, let’s go, boys,” yelled a voice from the
gallery. The soldiers and sailors started hustling the
people out of the seats. The police from the entrances con-
verged on the speakers. Ben and a couple of others were
arrested. The men in the audience who were of conscrip-
tion age were made to show their registration cards before
they could leave. Ben was hustled out into a closed limou-
sine with the blinds drawn before he could speak to Helen.
He’d hardly noticed who it was had clicked the handcuffs
on his wrists.
    They kept him for three days without anything to eat
or drink in a disused office in the Federal building on
Park Row. Every few hours a new bunch of detectives
would stamp into the room and question him. His head
throbbing, and ready to faint with thirst, he’d face the
ring of long yellow faces, jowly red faces, pimply faces,
boozers’ and hopheads’ faces, feel the eyes bonng into him5
sometimes they kidded and cajoled him, and sometimes
they bullied and threatened, one bunch brought in pieces
of rubber hose to beat him up with. He jumped up and
faced them. For some reason they didn’t beat him up, but
instead brought him some water and a couple of stale ham
sandwiches. After that he was able to sleep a little.
    An agent yanked him off his bench and led him out

                                                                               445

883
into a wellappointed ofHce where he was questioned almost
kindly by an elderly man at a mahogany desk with a bunch
of roses on the corner of it. The smell of the roses made
him feel sick. The elderly man said he could see his
lawyer and Morris Stein came into the room.
   ^^Benny^” he said, ^deave everything to me .      . . Mr.
Watkins has consented to quash all charges if youdl
promise to report for military training. It seems your
number’s been called.”
   ^Tf you let me out,” Ben said in a low trembling voice,
“I’ll do my best to oppose capitalist war until you arrest
me again.” Morris Stein and Mr. Watkins looked at each
other and shook their heads indulgently. “Well,” said Mr,
Watkins, “I can’t help but admire your spirit and wish it
was in a better cause.” It ended by his being let out on
fifteen thousand dollars bail on Morris Stein’s assurance
that he would do no agitating until the date of his trial.
The Steins wouldn’t tell him who put up the bail.
    Morris and Edna Stein gave him a room in their apart-
ment^ Fanya was there all the time. They fed him good
food and tried to make him drink wine with his meals and
a glass of milk before going to bed. He didn’t have any
interest in anything, slept as much as he could, read all the
books he found on the place. When Morris would try
to talk to him about his case he’d shut him up, “You’re
doing this, Morris ... do anything . . . why should I
care. I might as well be in jail as like this.” “Well, I must
say that’s a compliment,” Fanya said laughing.
    Helen Mauer called up several times to tell him how
things were going. She’d always say she had no news to
tell that she could say over the telephone, but he never
asked her to come up to see him. About as far as he went
from the Steins’ apartment was to go out every day to sit
for a while on a bench on the Drive and look out over the
grey Hudson at the rows of frame houses on the Jersey
 side and the grey palisades.

         446

884
    The day his case came up for trial the press was full of
hints of German victories. It was spring and sunny outside
the broad grimy windows of the courtroom, Ben sat sleep-
ily in the stuffy gloom. Everything seemed very simple.
Stein and the Judge had their little jokes together and the
Assistant District Attorney was positively genial. The jury
reported ^^guilty” and the judge sentenced him to twenty
years’ imprisonment. Morris Stein filed an appeal and the
judge let him stay out on bail. The only moment Ben came
to life was when he was allowed to address the court before
being sentenced. He made a speech about the revolutionary
movement he’d been preparing all these weeks. Even as
he said it it seemed silly and weak. He almost stopped in
the middle. His voice strengthened and filled the court-
room as he got to the end. Even the judge and the old
snuffling attendants sat up when he recited for his perora-
tion, the last words of the communist manifesto:
    In flace of the old bourgeois societyy with its classes and
class antagonismsy we shall have an associationy in which
the free development of each is the condition for the free
development of all.




    The appeal dragged and dragged. Ben started studying
law again. He wanted to work in Stein’s office to pay for
his keep, but Stein said it would be risky, he said the war
would be over soon and the red scare would die down, so
that he could get him off with a light sentence. He brought
lawbooks up for him to study and promised to take him into
 partnership if he passed his bar exam, once he could get
 his citizenship restored. Edna Stein was a fat spiteful
 woman and rarely spoke to himj Fanya fussed over him
 with nervous doting attentions that made him feel sick.
 He slept badly and his kidneys bothered him. One night
 he got up and dressed and was tiptoeing down the carpeted

                                                                               447

885
hall towards the door with his shoes in his hand, when
Fanya with her black hair down her back came out of the
door of her room. She was in a nightdress that showed her

3hnny figure and flat breasts. ^^Benny, where are you
going?’’
    ^^I’m going crazy here .    ,  . Pye got to get out.” His
teeth were chattering. ^^Pve got to get back into the move-
ment. .  . They’ll catch me and send me to jail right
away ... it will be better like that.”
    ^^You poor boy, you’re in no condition.” She threw her
arms round his neck and pulled him into her room.
    ^^Fanya, you gotto let me go. ... I might make it
across the Mexican border . .    , other guys have.”
     You’re crazy . . . and what about your baiP”
    ^What do I care . .     . don’t you see we gotto do some-
thing.”
    She’d pulled him down on her bed and was stroking his
forehead, ^Toor boy ... I love you so, Benny, couldn’t
                                                      ust a little teeny bit .   . .
yon think of me a little bit . . . j
I could help you so much in the movement.          . . . To-
morrow we’ll talk about it ... I want to help you,
Benny.” He let her untie his necktie.
    The armistice came, and news of the peace conference,
revolutionary movements all over Europe, Trotsky’s
armies driving the whites out of Russia, Fanya Stein told
everybody she and Ben were married and took him to live
with her at her studio apartment on 8th Street, where she
nursed him through the flu and double pneumonia. The
first day the doctor said he could go out she drove up the
Hudson in her Buick sedan. They came back in the early
summer gloaming to find a special delivery letter from
Morris, The circuit court had denied the appeal, but re-
duced the sentence to ten years. The next day at noon
he’d have to report to be delivered by his bondsmen to
the custody of the U.S. District Court. He’d probably go
to Atlanta. Soon after the letter Morris himself turned

886
up. Fanya had broken down and was crying hysterically.
Morris looked pale. “Ben,” he said, “we^re beaten . . .

                                                                           you’ll have
You’ll have to go to Atlanta for a while . . .
good company down there . .     . but don’t worry. We’ll
take your case to the President. Now that the war’s over
they can’t keep the liberal press muzzled any more.”
   ^^That’s all right,” said Ben, ^ht’s better to know the
worst.”
    Fanya jumped up from the couch where she’d been
sobbing and started screaming at her brother. When Ben
went out to walk around the block he left them quarrel-
ing bitterly. He found himself looking carefully at the
houses, the taxicabs, the streetlights, people’s faces, a funny
hydrant that had a torso like a woman’s, some bottles of
mineral oil stacked in a drugstore window, Nujol. He de-
cided he’d better go over to Brooklyn to say goodby to
the old people. At the subway station he stopped. He
                                   he’d write them.
hadn’t the strength j
    Next morning at nine he went down to Morris Stein’s

office with hio ouitcase in his hand. He’d made Fanya
promise not to come. He had to tell himself several times
he was going to jail, he felt as if he was going on a business
trip of some kind. He had on a new suit of English tweed
Fanya had bought him.
    Lower Broadway was all streaked red, white and blue
                   there were crowds of clerks and stenographers
with flags 3
and officeboys lining both pavements where he came up
out of the subway. Cops on motorcycles were keeping the
street clear. From down towards the Battery came the
sound of a military band playing Keef the Home Ftres
Burning, Everybody looked flushed and happy. It was hard
to keep from walking in step to the music in the fresh
summer morning that smelt of the harbor and ships. He
had to keep telling himself: those are the people who
sent Debs to jail, those are the people who shot Joe Hill^
who murdered Frank Little, those are the people who

                                                                              449

887
beat us up in Everett, who want me to rot for ten years

in jail.
   The colored elevatorboy grinned at him when he took
him up in the elevator, ^Ts they startin^ to go past yet,
mister?” Ben shook his head and frowned.
    The lawoffice looked clean and shiny. The telephone girl
had red hair and wore a gold star. There was an American
flag draped over the door of Stein’s private ofiice. Stein
was at his desk talking to an upperclasslooking young man
in a tweed suit. ^^Ben,” Stein said cheerily, ^^meet Stevens
Warner . .    . He’s just gotten out of Charlestown, served
a year for refusing to register.”
    ^^Not quite a year,” said the young man, getting up and
shaking hands. ^‘^I’m out on good behavior.”
    Ben didn’t like him, in his tweed suit and his expensive
                            all at once he remembered that he was
looking necktie 5
wearing the same kind of suit himself. The thought made
him sore. “How was it?” he asked coldly.
    “Not so bad, they had me working in the green-
house . . . They treated me fairly well when they found
out I’d already been to the front.”
    “How was that?”
    “Oh, in the ambulance service. .   .  . They just thought
I was mildly insane. ... It was a damned instructive
experience.”
    “They treat the workers different,” said Ben angrily.
    “And now we’re going to start a nationwide campaign
to get all the other boys out,” said Stein, getting to his feet
                                                                                    you’ll
and rubbing his hands, “starting with Debs . . .
see, Ben, you won’t be down there long . .       . people are
 coming to their senses already.”
    A burst of brassy music came up from Broadway, and
 the regular tramp of soldiers marching. They all looked
 out of the window. All down the long grey canyon flags
 were streaming out, uncoiling tickertape and papers glinted

         4?0

888
all through the ruddy sunlight, squirmed in the shadows j
people were yelling themselves hoarse.
   “Damn fools, said Warner, “it won’t make the dough-
boys forget about K.P.”
    Morris Stein came back into the room with a funny
brightness in his eyes. “Makes me feel maybe I missed
something.”
    “Well, Pve got to be going,” said Warner, shaking
hands again. “You certainly got a rotten break, Compton

. .  . don’t think for a minute we won’t be working night
and day to get you out . .   . I’m sure public sentiment will
change. We have great hopes of President Wilson      . .   .

after all, his labor record was fairly good before the war.”
    “I guess it’ll be the workers will get me out, if I’m
gotten out,” said Ben.
    Warner’s eyes were searching his face. Ben didn’t smile.
Warner stood before him uneasily for a moment and then
took his hand again. Ben didn’t return the pressure. “Good
luck,” said Warner and walked out of the office.
    “What’s that, one of these liberalminded college boys?’^
Ben asked of Stein. Stem nodded. He’d gotten interested
                                                                  great boy, Steve
in some papers on his desk. “Yes . . .
                       you’ll find some books
Warner . . .                                           or magazines in the
library .    . . I’ll be with you in a few minutes.”
    Ben went into the library and took down a book on
Torts. He read and read the fine print. When Stein came
to get him he didn’t know what he’d been reading or hov/
much time had passed. Walking up Broadway the going
was slow on account of the crowds and the bands and the
steady files of marching soldiers in khaki with tin hats
on their heads. Stem nudged him to take his hat off as
a regimental flag passed them in the middle of a fife and
drum corps. He kept it in his hand so as not to have to
take it off again. He took a deep breath of the dusty sunny
air of the street, full of girls’ perfumerysmells and gasolinei
from the exhaust of the trucks hauling the big guns, full

                                                                              451

889
of laughing and shouting and shuffle and tramp of feetj
then the dark doorway of the Federal Building gulped
them.
    It was a relief to have it all over, alone with the deputy
on the train for Atlanta. The deputy was a big morose
man with bluish sacks under his eyes. As the handcuffs
cut Ben’s wrist he unlocked them except when the train
was in a station. Ben remembered it was his birthdays h^
was twentythree years old.



                                                   NEWSREEL XLI


        m British Colonial Office quarters it is believed that
Australian irritation will diminish as soon as it is realized that
the substance is more important than the shadow. It may be
stated that press representatives who are expeditious in sending
their telegrams at an early hour, suffer because their telegrams
are thrown into baskets. Others which come later are heaped
on top of them and in the end the messages on top of the
basket are dealt with first. But this must not be taken as an
insult. Count von Brochdorf-Ranzau was very weak and it
was only his physical condition that kept him from rising

                 PRIVATES HOLD UP CABMAN

                   Hold the jort for we are coming
                   Union men be strongs
                   Side by side we battle onward^
                   Victory will come*

        New York City Federation Says Evening Gowns Are
Demoralizing Youth of the Land

           SOLDIERS OVERSEAS FEAR LOSS
                                  OF GOLD V

          CONSCRIPTION A PUZZLE

890
         Is there hostile propaganda at work in Pans?
                     We meet today in Freedom's cause
                        And raise our voices high
                    We^ll join our hands in union strong
                     To battle or to die
          FRANCE YET THE FRONTIER OF
                                    FREEDOM

        provision is made whereby the wellbeing and develop-
 ment of backward and colonial regions are regarded as the
sacred trust of civilization over which the league of nations
exercises supervising care
 REDS WEAKENING WASHINGTON HEARS
                    Hold the jort for we are ooming
                    Union men be strong

        the marine workers affiliation meeting early last night
at no. 26 Park Place voted to start a general walkout at 6
A.M. tomorrow
  BURLESON ORDERS ALL POSTAL TELE--
                 GRAPH NEWS SUPPRESSED

       his reply was an order to his followers to hang these two
lads on the spot. They were placed on chairs under trees,
halters fastened on the boughs were placed around their necks,
and then they were maltreated until they pushed the chair
away from them with their feet in order to finish their tor-
ments


                               THE CAMERA EYE (42)


       four hours we casuals pile up scrapiron in the flatcars

and four hours we drag the scrapiron off the flatcars and

pile it on the side of the track KEEP THE BOYS FIT

                                                                              4-53

891
ro GO HOME is the slogan of the YMCA                   In the

morning the shadows of the poplars point west and in

the afternoon they point out east where Persia is the

jagged bits of old Iron cut Into our hands through the

canvas gloves a kind of grey slagdust plugs our noses and

ears stings eyes     four hunkies a couple of wops             a

bohunk dagoes          guineas two little dark guys with

blue chins nobody can talk to

       spare parts no outfit wanted to use

       mashed mudguards busted springs old spades and

shovels entrenching tools twisted hospital cots      a moun-

tain of nuts and bolts of all sizes        four million miles of

barbedwire chickenwire rabbitfence      acres of tin roofing

square miles of parked trucks          long parades of loco-

motives strung along the yellow rads of the sidings
       KEEP THE BOYS FIT TO GO up in the office

the grumpy sergeants doing the paperwork dont know

where home is lost our outfits our service records our alu-

minum numberplates no spika de Engliss no entlendo com-

prend pas no capisco nyeh panimayoo

        day after day the shadows of the poplars point west

northwest north northeast east When they desolt they

always heads south the corporal said       Pretty tough but

if he aint got a soivice record how can we make out his

discharge KEEP OUR BOYS FIT for whatthehell the

war’s over

        scrap

         454

892
                                                      NEWSREEL XLII


        it was a gala day for Seatde. Enormous crowds not only
filled the streets on the line of march from the pier but finally
later in the evening machmeguns were placed in position, the
guardsmen withstanding a shower of missies until their in-»

action so endangered them the officers gave the order to fire.
WOULD CUT OFF LIGHT. President Lowell of Har-
vard University has urged the students to serve as strikebreak-

ers. “In accordance with its tradition of public service, the
university desires at this time of crisis to maintain order and
support the laws of the Commonwealth.”

         THREE ARMIES FIGHT FOR KIEW

               Calls Situation a Crime against Civilization

     TO MAKE US INVULNERABLE

        during the funeral services of Horace Traubel, literary
executor and biographer of Walt Whitman, this afternoon,
a fire broke out in the Unitarian Church of the Messiah, Pe^

riodicals, tugboats and shipyards were effected. 2000 pas-
sengers held up at Havre from which Mr. Wilson embarked

to review the Pacific fleet, but thousands were massed on each

side of the street seemingly satisfied merely to get a glimpse of

the President. As the George Washington steamed slowly to

her berth in Hoboken through the crowded lower bay, every

craft afloat gave welcome to King Albert and Queen Elizabeth
by hoarse blasts of their whistles

           CRUCIBLE STEEL CONTINUES TO LEAD MARKET

                              My country ^tis of thee
                              Sweet land of hbertee
                              Of thee I sing





                                                                                       455

893
                                                                  —


                                                PAUL BUNYAN

       When Wesley Everest came home from overseas
and got his discharge from the army he went back to
his old job of logging. His folks were of the old
Kentucky and Tennessee stock of woodsmen and squir-
relhunters who followed the trail blazed by Lewis and
Clark into the rainy giant forests of the Pacific slope.
Tn the army Everest was a sharpshooter, won a medal
^or a crack shot.
        (Since the days of the homesteaders the western
promoters and the politicians and lobbyists in Wash-
ington had been busy with the rainy giant forests of the
Pacific slope, with the result that:

       ten monofoly groufs aggregating only one thou-
sand eight hundred cmd two holders^ monopolized one
thousand two hundred and eight billiony eight hundred
million^

                          [ 1,208,800,000,000]
       square feet of standing timber^ . . . enough stand-
ing timber ... to yield the flanks necessary \over
and above the marmfacturing wastagel to make a float-
ing bridge more than two feet thick and more than five
miles %mde from New York to Liverpool;

        wood for scaffolding, wood for jerrybuilding resi-
dential suburbs, billboards, wood for shacks and ships
and shantytowns, pulp for tabloids, yellow journals,
editorial pages, advertizing copy, mailorder catalogues,
filingcards, army paperwork, handbills, flimsy.)

        Wesley Everest was a logger like Paul Bunyan.

        The lumberjacks, loggers, shingleweavers, saw-
                                                                                the
mill workers were the helots of the timber empire j
I.W.W. put the idea of industrial democracy in Paul
        456

894
                                                                                            )



Banyan’s headj wobbly organizers said the forests
ought to belong to the whole people, said Paul Bunyan
ought to be paid in real money instead of in company
scrip, ought to have a decent place to dry his clothes,
wet from the sweat of a day’s work in zero weather and
snow, an eight hour day, clean bunkhouses, wholesome
            when Paul Bunyan
grub 5                                       came back from making
Europe safe for the democracy of the Big Four, he
joined the lumberjack’s local to help make the Pacific
slope safe for the workingstiffs. The wobblies were
reds. Not a thing in this world Paul Bunyan’s ascared
of.
         (To be a red in the summer of 1919 was worse
than being a hun or a pacifist in the summer of 1917-

        The timber owners, the sawmill and shinglekings
                          they’d won the war (in the course of
were patriots j
which the price of lumber had gone up from $16 a
thousand feet to $116; there are even cases where the
government paid as high as $1200 a thousand for
                they set out to clean the reds out of the log-
spruce) ;
ging camps j
        free American Institutions must be preserved at
any costj
        so they formed the Employers Association and the
Legion of Loyal Loggers, they made it worth their
while for bunches of ex-soldiers to raid I.W.W. halls,
lynch and beat up organizers, burn subversive literature,

        On Memorial Day 1918 the boys of the American
Legion in Centralia led by a group from the Chamber
of Commerce wrecked the I.W.W. hall, beat up every-
body they found in it, jailed some and piled the rest of
the boys in a truck and dumped them over the county
line, burned the papers and pamphlets and auctioned

                                                                              457

895
                                                              the wobblies’ desk
off the fittings for the Red Cross j
still stands in the Chamber of Commerce.
        The loggers hired a new hall and the union kept
on growing. Not a thing in this world Paul Bunyan’s
ascared of.

        Before Armistice Day, 1919, the town was full of
rumors that on that day the hall would be raided for
keeps. A young man of good family and pleasant man-
ners, Warren O. Grimm, had been an officer with the
                                              that made him an authority
American force in Siberia 5
on labor and Bolsheviks, so he was chosen by the busi-
ness men to lead the iOO% forces in the Citizens Pro-
tective League to put the fear of God into Paul Bunyan.
        The first thing the brave patriots did was pick up
a blind newsdealer and thrash him and drop him in a
ditch across the county line.
        The loggers consulted counsel and decided they
had a right to defend their hall and themselves in case
of a raid. Not a thing in this world Paul Bunyan’s
ascared of.

        Wesley Everest was a crack shot} Armistice Day
he put on his uniform and filled his pockets with car-
tridges. Wesley Everest was not much of a talker} at
a meeting in the Union Hall the Sunday before the
raid, there’d been talk of the chance of a lynching bee}
Wesley Everest had been walking up and down the aisle
with his O.D. coat on over a suit of overalls, distribut-
ing literature and pamphlets} when the boys said they
wouldn’t stand for another raid, he stopped in his tracks
with the papers under his arm, rolled himself a brown-
paper cigarette and smiled a funny quiet smile.

        Armistice Day was raw and cold, the mist rolled in
from Puget Sound and dripped from the dark boughs
        458

896
of the spruces and the shiny storefronts of the town,
Warren O. Grimm commanded the Centralia section of
the parade. The exsoldiers were in their uniforms.
When the parade passed by the union hall without halt-
ing, the loggers inside breathed easier, but on the way
back the parade halted in front of the hall. Somebody
whistled through his fingers. Somebody yelled, “Let’s
go ... at ’em, boys.” They ran towards the wobbly
hall. Three men crashed through the door. A riflo
spoke. Rifles crackled on the hills back of the town,
roared in the back of the hall.
       Grimm and an exsoldier were hit.
       The parade broke in disorder but the men with
rifles formed again and rushed the hall. They found
a few unarmed men hiding in an old icebox, a boy in
uniform at the head of the stairs with his arms over his
head.
       Wesley Everest shot the magazine of his rifle out,
dropped it and ran for the woods. As he ran he broke
through the crowd in the back of the hall, held them
off with a blue automatic, scaled a fence, doubled down
an alley and through the back street. The mob fol-
lowed. They dropped the coils of rope they had with
them to lynch Britt Smith the I.W.W. secretary. It was
Wesley Everest’s drawing them off that kept them
from lynching Britt Smith right there.
       Stopping once or twice to hold the mob off with
some scattered shots, Wesley Everest ran for the river,
started to wade across. Up to his waist in water he
stopped and turned.
       Wesley Everest turned to face the mob with a
funny quiet smile on his face. He’d lost his hat and
his hail dripped with water and sweat. They started
to rush him.
       “Stand back,” he shouted, “if there’s bulls in the
crowd I’ll submit to arrest.”

                                                                       459

897
         The mob was at him. He shot from the hip four
times, then his gun jammed. He tugged at the trigger,
and taking cool aim shot the foremost of them dead.
It was Dale Hubbard, another exsoldier, nephew of
one of the big lumber men of Centralia.
        Then he threw his empty gun away and fought
with his fists. The mob had him. A man bashed his
teeth in with the butt of a shotgun. Somebody brought
a rope and they started to hang him. A woman el-
bowed through the crowd and pulled the rope off his
neck.
        “You haven’t the guts to hang a man in the day-
time,” was what Wesley Everest said.
        They took him to the jail and threw him on the
floor of a cell. Meanwhile they were putting the other
loggers through the third degree.
        That night the city lights were turned off. A
mob smashed in the outer door of the jail. “Don’t
shoot, boys, here’s your man,” said the guard. Wesley
Everest met them on his feet, “Tell the boys I did my
best,” he whispered to the men in the other cells.
        They took him off in a limousine to the Chehalis
River bridge. As Wesley Everest lay stunned in the
bottom of the car a Centralia business man cut his penis
and testicles off with a razor. Wesley Everest gave a
great scream of pain. Somebody has remembered that
after a while he whispered, “For God’s sake, men, shoot
me  . . . don’t let me suffer like this.” Then they
hanged him from the bridge in the glare of the head-
lights.

        The coroner at his inquest thought it was a great
joke.
        He reported that Wesley Everest had broken out
of jail and run to the Chehalis River bridge and tied a
rope around his neck and jumped off, finding the rope
        460

898
too short he’d climbed back and fastened on a longer
one, had jumped off again, broke his neck and shot
himself full of holes.
        They jammed the mangled wreckage into a pack-
ing box and buried it.
        Nobody knows where they buried the body of
Wesley Everest, but the six loggers they caught they
buried in the Walla Walla Penitentiary.



     RICHARD ELLSWORTH SAVAGE


    The pinnacles and buttresses of the apse of Notre Dame
looked crumbly as cigarash in the late afternoon sunshine,
^^But youVe got to stay, Richard,” Eleanor was saying as
she went about the room collecting the teathings on a tray
for the maid to take out.           had to do something about
Evehne and her husband before they sailed . .         . after
all, she^s one of my oldest friends , . . and IVe invited
all her wildeyed hangerson to come in afterwards.” A fleet
of big drays loaded with winebarrels rumbled along the
quay outside. Dick was staring out into the grey ash of
the afternoon. ^^Do close that window, Richard, the dust

is pouring in. .   . . Of course, I realize that you’ll have to
leave early to go to J.W.’s meeting with the press.       .  . .

If it hadn’t been for that he’d have had to come, poor
dear, but you know how busy he is.” ^Well, I don’t exactly
find the time hanging on my hands .  . but I’ll stay and
greet the happy pair. In the army I’d forgotten about
work.” He got to his feet and walked back into the room
to light a cigarette.
    ^Well, you needn’t be so mournful about it.”
        don’t see you dancing in the streets yourself.”
          think Eveline’s made a very grave mistake . .           ,

                                                                              4.61

899
A.mericans are just too incredibly frivolous about marriage.’^
   Dick’s throat got tight. He found himself noticing how

stiffly he put the cigarette to his mouth, inhaled the smoke
and blew it out. Eleanor’s eyes were on his face, cool and
searching. Dick didn’t say anything, he tried to keep his
face stiff.
    ^Were you in love with that poor girl, Richard?”
    Dick blushed and shook his head.
    ^^Well, you needn’t pretend to be so hard about it . . .

It’s just young to pretend to be hard about things.”

    ^^Jilted by army officer, Texas belle killed in plane
wreck . .    . but most of the correspondents know me and
did their best to kill that story. . . . What did you expect
me to do, jump into the grave like Hamlet^ The Hon.
Mr. Barrow did all of that that was necessary. It was a
frightfully tough break . . He let himself drop into
a chair.       wish I was hard enough so that I didn’t give
a damn about anything. When history’s walking on all
our faces is no time for pretty sentiments.” He made a
funny face and started talking out of the corner of his
mouth. ^^All I ask sister is to see de woild with Uncle
Woodrow .    .  . le beau monde sans blague tu sais.”
Eleanor was laughing her little shrill laugh when they
heard Eveline’s and Paul Johnson’s voices outside on the
landing.
    Eleanor had bought them a pair of little blue parakeets
 in a cage. They drank Montracher and ate roast duck
 cooked with oranges. In the middle of the meal Dick had
 to go up to the Crillon. It was a relief to be out in the
 air, sitting in an open taxi, running past the Louvre made
 enormous by the late twilight under which the Paris streets
 seemed empty and very long ago like the Roman forum.
 All the way up past the Tuileries he played with an im-
 pulse to tell the taxidriver to take him to the opera, to the
 circus, to the fortifications, anywhere to hell and gone.
          462

900
He set his pokerface as he walked past the doorman at the
Crillon.
   Miss Williams gave him a relieved smile when he
appeared in the door. ^^Oh, I was afraid youM be late,
Captain Savage.” Dick shook his head and grinned. Any-
body come?” ^^Ohj they’re coming in swarms. It’ll make
the front pages,” she whispered. Then she had to answer
the phone.
   The big room was already filling up with newspaper
men. Jerry Burnham whispered as he shook hands, ^^Say,
Dick, if it’s a typewritten statement you won’t leave the
room alive.” ^^Don’t worry,” said Dick with a grin. ^^Say,
where’s Robbins?” ^^He’s out of the picture,” said Dick
dryly,        think he’s in Nice drinking up the last of his
liver.”
   J.W. had come in by the other door and was moving
around the room shaking hands with men he knew, being
introduced to others. A young fellow with untidy hair and
his necktie crooked put a paper in Dick’s hand. “Say, ask
him if he’d answer some of these questions.” “Is he going
home to campaign for the League of Nations?” somebody
asked in his other ear.
    Everybody was settled in chairs j J.W. leaned over the
back of his and said that this was going to be an informal
chat, after all, he was an old newspaper man himself. There
was a pause. Dick glanced around at J.W.’s pale slightly
jowly face just in time to catch a flash of his blue eyes
around the faces of the correspondents. An elderly man
asked in a grave voice if Mr. Moorehouse cared to say
anything about the differences of opinion between the
President and Colonel House. Dick settled himself back
to be bored. J.W. answered with a cool smile that they’d
better ask Colonel House himself about that. When some-
body spoke the word oil everybody sat up in their chairs.
Yes, he could say definitely an accord, a working agree-
ment had been reached between certain American oil

                                                                              463

901
producers and perhaps the Royal Dutch-Shell, oh, no, o£
course not to set prices but a proof of a new era of inter-
national cooperation that was dawning in which great
aggregations of capital would work together for peace and
democracy, against reactionaries and militarists on the one
hand and against the bloody forces of bolshevism on the
other. And what about the League of Nations?'             new
era,” went on J.W. in a confidential tone, ^fis dawning.”
    Chairs scraped and squeaked, pencils scratched on pads,
everybody was very attentive. Everybody got it down that
J.W. was sailing for New York on the Rochambeau in
two weeks. After the newspapermen had gone off to make
their cable deadline, J.W. yawned and asked Dick to
make his excuses to Eleanor, that he was really too tired
to get down to her place tonight. When Dick got out on
the streets again there was still a little of the violet of
                                                      goddam it, he could take
dusk in the sky. He hailed a taxi j
a taxi whenever he wanted to now.
    It was pretty stiff at Eleanor’s, people were sitting
around in the parlor and in one bedroom that had been
fitted up as a sort of boudoir with a tall mirror draped
with lace, talking uncomfortably and intermittently. The
bridegroom looked as if he had ants under his collar,
Eveline and Eleanor were standing in the window talking
with a gauntfaced man who turned out to be Don Stevens
who’d been arrested in Germany by the Army of Occupa-
tion and for whom Eveline had made everybody scamper
around so. ^^And any time I get in a jam,” he was saying,
     always find a little Jew who helps get me out . . . this
time he was a tailor.”
    “Well, Eveline isn’t a little Jew or a tailor,” said
Eleanor icily, “but I can tell you she did a great deal.”
    Stevens walked across the room to Dick and asked him
what sort of a man Moorehouse was. Dick found himself
blushing. He wished Stevens wouldn’t talk so loud. “Why,
he’s a man of extraordinary ability,” he stammered.
        464

902
        thought he was a stuiffed shirt ... I didn’t see what
those damn fools of the bourgeois press thought they were
getting for a story ... I was there for the D.//.”
    ^Tesj I saw you/’ said Dick.
    “I thought maybe, from what Steve Warner said, you
were the sort of guy who’d be boring from within.”
    ^‘^Bormg m another sense, I guess, boring and bored.”
   Stevens stood over him glaring at him as if he was going
to hit him. “Well, we’ll know soon enough which side a
man’s on. We’ll all have to show our faces, as they say in
Russia, before long.”
    Eleanor interrupted with a fresh smoking bottle of
champagne. Stevens went back to talk to Eveline in the
window. “Why, I’d as soon have a Baptist preacher in the
house,” Eleanor tittered.
    “Damn it, I hate people who get their pleasure b)
making other people feel uncomfortable,” grumbled Dick
under his breath. Eleanor smiled a quick V-shaped smile
and gave his arm a pat with her thin white hand, that
was tipped by long nails pointed and pink and marked
with halfmoons. “So do I, Dick, so do I.”
    When Dick whispered that he had a headache and
thought he’d go home and turn in, she gripped his arm
and pulled him into the hall. “Don’t you dare go home
and leave me alone with this frost.” Dick made a face and
followed her back into the salon. She poured him a glass
of champagne from the bottle she still held in her hand
“Cheer up Eveline,” she whispered squeakily. “She’s about
ready to go down for the third time.”
    Dick stood around for hours talking to Mrs. Johnson
about books, plays, the opera. Neither of them seemed
to be able to keep track of what the other was saying.
Eveline couldn’t keep her eyes off her husband. He had
a young cubbish look Dick couldn^t help likings he was
standing by the sideboard getting tight with Stevens, who
kept making ugly audible remarks about parasites and the

                                                                               465

903
lahdedah boys of the bourgeoisie. It went on for a long
time. Paul Johnson got sick and Dick had to help him find
the bathroom. When he came back into the salon he almost
had a fight with Stevens^ who, after an argument about
the Peace Conference, suddenly hauled off with his fists
clenched and called him a goddam fairy. The Johnsons
hustled Stevens out. Eleanor came up to Dick and put her
arm around his neck and said he’d been magnificent.
    Paul Johnson came back upstairs after they’d gone to
get the parakeets. He looked pale as a sheet. One of the
birds had died and was lying on its back stiff with his claws
in the air at the bottom of the cage.
    At about three o’clock Dick rode home to his hotel in
a taxi.



                                               NEWSREEL XLIIJ


        die placards borne by the radicals were taken away from
them, their clothing torn and eyes blackened before the service
and ex-service men had finished with them
        34 Die After Drinking Wood Alcohol Trains in France
May Soon Stop
        Gerard Throws His Hat into the Ring
SUPREME COURT DASHES LAST HOPE OF
                              MOIST MOUTH

 Life boat called by rocket signals searches in
                         VAIN FOR SIXTEEN HOURS

                    America I love you
                        You?re like a sweetheart of mine

    LES GENS SAGES FUIENT LES REUNIONS POLITIQUES
      WALLSTREET CLOSES WEAK: FEARS
                               TIGHT MONEY
         466

904
                     From ocean to ocean
                         For you my devotion
                     Is touching each boundary line

                 LITTLE CARUSO EXPECTED

        his mother, Mrs. W. D. McGilhcudy said: ‘‘My first
husband was killed while crossing tracks in front of a train,
my second husband was killed in the same way and now it is
my son

                     Just like a little baby
                          Climbing its mother^s knee

    MACHINEGUNS MOW DOWN MOBS IN
                                     KNOXVILLE

                                    America I love you

         Aviators Lived for Six Days on Shellfish
         the police compelled the demonstrators to lower these

flags and ordered the convention not to exhibit any red em-
blems save the red in the starry banner of the United States,

It may not be indiscreet to state, however, in any case it cannot
dim his glory, that General Pershing was confined to his state-
room through seasickness when the message arrived. Old
Fellow of 89 Treasures Chewinggum as Precious Souvenir
Couldn’t Maintain His Serenity In Closing League Debates

               And there^s a hundred million others like me




              THE BODY OF AN AMERICAN


         Whereasthe Congressoftheunitedstates byaconcurrentreso-
lutionadoptedon the4thdayofmarch lastauthonzedthe Secretary-
ofwar to cause to be brought to theunitedstatesthe body of an
 Americanwhowasamemberoftheamericanexpeditionaryforcesin-
europe wholosthislifedurmgtheworldwarandwhoseidentityhas-

                                                                                        467

905
notbeenestablished for burial uithememonalamphitheatreofthe
nationalcemeteryatarlingtonVirginia


         In the tarpaper morgue at Chalons-sur-Marne in
the reek of chloride of lime and the dead, they picked
out the pine box that held all that was left of
        enie menie minie moe plenty other pine boxes
stacked up there containing what they’d scraped up of
Richard Roe
        and other person or persons unknown. Only one
can go. How did they pick John Doe?
        Make sure he amt a dinge, boys,
        make sure he aint a guinea or a kike,
        how can you tell a guy’s a hunredpercent when all

I’ou’i’e got’s a gunnysack full of bones, bronze buttons
stamped with the screaming eagle and a pair of roll
puttees ?

        .  . . and the gagging chloride and the puky dirt-
stench of the yearold dead . . .

        The day withal was too meaningful and tragic for ap-
plause. Silence, tears, songs and prayer, muffled drums and
soft music were the instrumentalities today of national approba-
tion.


        John Doe was born (thudding din of blood in love
into the shuddering soar of a man and a woman alone
indeed together lurching into
        and ninemonths sick drowse waking into scared
agony and the pain and blood and mess of birth) . John
Doe was born
        and raised in Brooklyn, in Memphis, near the lake-
front in Cleveland, Ohio, in the stench of the stock-
yards in Chi, on Beacon Hill, in an old brick house in
Alexandria Virginia, on Telegraph Hill, in a halftim-
bered Tudor cottage in Portland the city of roses,
        4^8

906
                      —



        in the Lying-In Hospital old Morgan endowed on
Stuyvesant Square,
        across the railroad tracks, out near the country
club, in a shack cabin tenement apartmenthouse ex-
clusive residential suburb,
        scion of one of the best families in the social reg-

ister, won first prize in the baby parade at Coronado
Beach, was marbles champion of the Little Rock gram-
marschools, crack basketballplayer at the Booneville
High, quarterback at the State Reformatory, having
saved the sheriff’s kid from drowning m the Little
Missouri River was invited to Washington to be photo-
graphed shaking hands with the President on the White
House steps j


        though this was a time of mourning, such an assemblage
necessarily has about it a touch of color. In the boxes are
seen the court uniforms of foreign diplomats, the gold braid
of our own and foreign fleets and armies, the black of the con-
ventional morning dress of American statesmen, the varicol-
ored fuis and outdoor wrapping garments of mothers and
sisters come to mourn, the drab and blue of soldiers and sailors,
the glitter of musical instruments and the white and black of
a vested choir

        —busboy harveststiff hogcaller boyscout champeen
cornshucker of Western Kansas bellhop at the United
States Hotel at Saratoga Springs office boy callboy
fruiter telephone lineman longshoreman lumberjack
plumber’s helper,
        worked for an exterminating company in Union
City, filled pipes in an opium joint in Trenton, N. J.
        y.M.C.A. secretary, express agent, truckdriver,
fordmechanic, sold books in Denver Colorado: Madam
would you be willing to help a young man work his way
through college?

                                                                               469

907
         :



        President jflardmg, with a reverence seemingly more sig-
Bihcant because of his high temporal station, concluded his
speech

        We are met today to fay the hnfersonal tribute;
       the name of him whose body hes before us took flight with
his imferishable soul . . 
        as a tyfical soldier of this refresentative democracy he
fought and died believing in the indisfutable justice of his
c^cfuntry^s cause . . .

        by raising his nght hand and asking the thousands within
ihe sound of his voice to join in the prayer:

        Our Father which art in heaven hallowed be thy
name . . .

        Naked he went into the armyj
        they weighed you, measured you, looked for flat
feet, squeezed your penis to see if you had clap, looked
up your anus to see if you had piles, counted your teeth,
made you cough, listened to your heart and lungs, made
you read the letters on the card, charted your urine and
your intelligence,
        gave you a service record for a future (imperish-
able soul)
        and an identification tag stamped with your serial
number to hang around your neck, issued O D regula-
tion equipment, a condiment can and a copy of the
articles of war.
        Atten^SHUN suck in your gut you c                  r wipe
that smile off your face eyes right wattj a tink dis is t
choirch-social? For-war-D’ARCH.

        John Doe
        and Richard Roe and other person or persons un-
known
        drilled hiked, manual of arms, ate slum, learned
        470

908
                                —



to salute, to soldier, to loaf in the latrines, forbidden to
smoke on deck, overseas guard duty, forty men and
eight horses, shortarm inspection and the ping of shrap-
nel and the shrill bullets combing the air and the sore-
head woodpeckers the machineguns mud cooties gas-
masks and the itch.
       Say feller tell me how I can get hack to my outfit.

       John Doe had a head
       for twentyodd years intensely the nerves of the
eyes the ears the palate the tongue the fingers the toes
the armpits, the nerves warmfeeling under the skin
charged the coiled brain with hurt sweet warm cold
mine must dont sayings print headlines:
        Thou shalt not the multiplication table long di-
vision, Now is the time for all good men knocks but
once at a young man’s door, It’s a great life if Ish
gebibbel. The first five years’ll be the Safety First,
Suppose a hun tried to rape your my country right or
wrong. Catch ’em young. What he dont know wont
treat ’em rough. Tell ’em nothin, He got what was
coming to him he got his, This is a white man’s coun-

try, Kick the bucket, Gone west. If you dont like it
you can croaked him
        Say buddy cant you tell me how 1 can get back to
my outfit?

        Cant help jumpin when them things go oflF, give
me the trots them things do. I lost my identification tag
swimmin in the Marne, roughhousin with a guy while
we was waitin to be deloused, in bed with a girl named
Jeanne (Love moving picture wet French postcard
 dream began with saltpeter in the cofFee and ended at

 the propho station) ;

        Say soldier for chrissake cant you tell me how I
 <an get back to my outfit?
                                                                        471

909
        John Doe’s
        heart pumped blood:
        alive thudding silence of blood in your ears
        down in the clearing in the Oregon forest where the
punkins were punkincolor pouring into the blood
through the eyes and the fallcolored trees and the
bronze hoopers were hopping through the dry grass,
where tiny striped snails hung on the underside of the
blades and the flies hummed, wasps droned, bumblebees
buzzed, and the woods smelt of wine and mushrooms
and apples, homey smell of fall pouring into the blood,
        and I dropped the tin hat and the sweaty pack and
lay flat with the dogday sun licking my throat and
adamsapple and the tight skin over the breastbone.

        The shell had his number on it.

        The blood ran into the ground.

        The service record dropped out of the filing cab-
inet when the quartermaster sergeant got blotto that
time they had to pack up and leave the billets in a
hurry.
         The identification tag was in the bottom of the
Marne.

         The blood ran into the ground, the brains oozed
out of the cracked skull and were licked up by the
trenchrats, th' belly swelled and raised a generation of
bluebottle flies,
         and the incorruptible skeleton,
         and the scraps of dried viscera and skin bundled
in khaki

         they took to Chalons-sur-Marne
         and laid it out neat in a pine coffin

         472

910
        and took it home to God’s Country on a battleship
        and buried it in a sarcophagus in the Memoria]
Amphitheatre in the Arlington National Cemetery
        and draped the Old Glory over it
        and the bugler played taps
        and Mr. Harding prayed to God and the diplo-
mats and the generals and the admirals and the brass-
hats and the politicians and the handsomely dressed
ladies out of the society column of the Washington
Post stood up solemn
        and thought how beautiful sad Old Glory God’s
Country it was to have the bugler play taps and the
three volleys made their ears ring.

        Where his chest ought to have been they pinned
        the Congressional Medal, the D.S.C., the Me-
daille Militaire, the Belgian Croix de Guerre, the Ital-
ian gold medal, the Vitutea Militara sent by Queen
Mane of Rumania, the Czechoslovak war cross, the
Virtuti Militari of the Poles, a wreath sent by Hamilton
Fish, Jr., of New York, and a little wampum presented
by a deputation of Arizona redskins in warpaint and
feathers. All the Washingtonians brought flowers.

        Woodrow Wilson brought a bouquet of poppies.


